
IMPORTANT NOTES
ON THIS BOOK
(DISCLAIMER)
I built the Navalmanack entirely out of transcripts, Tweets,
and talks Naval has shared. Every attempt is made to present
Naval in his own words. However, there are a few important
points.
 The transcripts have been edited for clarity and brevity
(multiple times).
 Not all sources are primary (some excerpts are from other
writers quoting Naval).
 I cant be 100 percent certain of every sources authenticity.
 Concepts and interpretations change over time, medium,
and context.
 Please verify phrasing with a primary source before citing
Naval from this text.
 Please interpret generously.
By definition, everything in this book is taken out of context.
Interpretations will change over time. Read and interpret gen-

erously. Understand the original intent may be different than
your interpretation in a different time, medium, format, and
context.
In the process of creating this book, I may have mistakenly
re-contextualized, misinterpreted, or misunderstood things.
As content passed through time, space, and medium, some
phrasing may have shifted in flight. Every effort has been made
to maintain the original intent, but errors are (very) possible.
Interviews have been transcribed, edited, rearranged, and
re-edited for readability. I did my best to keep Navals ideas
in his own words.
All brilliance in this book is Navals; any mistakes are mine.
TWEETS AND TWEETSTORMS
Tweets are formatted like pull quotes but are unique content.
I use them to summarize or punctuate an idea from the main
prose.
This formatting shows Im quoting a tweet.
Tweetstorms are connected tweets, formatted like this:
This is the first tweet in a tweetstorm.

This is the second tweet. Tweetstorms are longer series of
tweets all threaded together, similar to a blog post.
BOLDED QUESTIONS
Many excerpts are from interviews by fantastic creators like
Shane Parrish, Sarah Lacy, Joe Rogan, and Tim Ferriss. The
questions are bolded. For simplicity and continuity, I do not
distinguish various interviewers from each other.
NON-NARRATIVE
This is a choose-your-own adventure book. Jump to anything
that interests you and skip anything that doesnt.
LOOK IT UP
If you find a word or concept youre not familiar with, look it
up. Or, read on to find more context. Some referenced ideas
are expanded upon later in the book.
CITATIONS
Citations (like ) indicate the end of an excerpt. Ive done my
best to maintain context for smooth reading. Sources are in
the appendix for reference. Some sources appear many times
and do not appear in order.
FOREWORD
B Y T I M F E R R I S S
Dear Reader,
It feels strange for me to write these words, as I committed
many years ago to never write forewords.
Im making a rare exception in this case for three reasons. First,
a free version of this book is being offered to the world in a
digital/Kindle/eBook format with no strings attached. Second,
Ive known Naval for more than a decade and have long wanted
someone to compile this book. Third, Im increasing the like-
lihood of Navals next child being named Tim (Ill settle for
Timbo, if he prefers).
Naval is one of the smartest people Ive ever met, and hes also
one of the most courageous. Not in the run into the fire with-
out thinking twice sense, but in the think twice and then tell
everyone theyre focusing on the wrong fire sense. He is rarely
part of any consensus, and the uniqueness of his life, lifestyle,
family dynamics, and startup successes is a reflection of con-
scious choices hes made to do things differently.

He can be as blunt as a foot to the face, but thats part of what I
love and respect about him: you never have to guess what Naval
is thinking. Ive never had to guess how hes feeling about me,
someone else, or a situation. This is a huge relief in a world of
double-talk and ambiguity.
Weve shared a lot of meals, shared a lot of deals, and hopped
around the world together. Thats all to say that, while I con-
sider myself a good people-watcher, I consider myself an
excellent Naval-watcher. He is one of the people I call most
for advice, and Ive watched him in many habitats through
many seasons: easy times, hard times, recessions, booms
you name it.
Sure, hes the CEO and a co-founder of AngelList. Sure, he
previously co-founded Vast.com and Epinions, which went
public as part of Shopping.com. Sure, hes an angel investor
and has invested in many mega successes, including Twitter,
Uber, Yammer, and OpenDNS, to name but a few.
Thats all great, of course, and it shows Naval is a world-class
operator instead of an armchair philosopher.
But I dont take his perspectives, maxims, and thoughts seri-
ously because of the business stuff. There are lots of miserable
successful people out there. Be careful about modeling those,
as you will get all the bathwater with the baby.
I take Naval seriously because he:
 Questions nearly everything
 Can think from first principles
 Tests things well
 Is good at not fooling himself
 Changes his mind regularly
 Laughs a lot
 Thinks holistically
 Thinks long-term
 Anddoesnt take himself too goddamn seriously.
That last one is important.
This book will give you a good taste of what that cocktail of
bullets looks like in Navals head.
So, pay attentionbut dont simply parrot his words. Follow
his advicebut only if it holds up after scrutiny and stress-
testing in your own life. Consider everythingbut take nothing
as gospel. Naval would want you to challenge him, as long as
you bring your A-game.
Naval has changed my life for the better, and if you approach
the following pages like a friendly but highly competent spar-
ring partner, he might just change yours.
Keep your hands up and your mind open.
Pura Vida,
Tim Ferriss
Austin, Texas
ERICS NOTE (ABOUT
THIS BOOK)
Throughout his career, Naval has generously shared his
wisdom, and millions of people around the world follow his
advice on building wealth and living happily.
Naval Ravikant is an icon in Silicon Valley and startup culture
around the world. He founded multiple successful companies
(Epinions during the 2000 dot-com crash, AngelList in 2010).
Naval is also an angel investor, betting early on companies like
Uber, Twitter, Postmates, and hundreds more.
More than a financial success, Naval has been sharing his own
philosophy of life and happiness, attracting readers and listen-
ers throughout the world. Naval is broadly followed because he
is a rare combination of successful and happy. After a lifetime
of study and application of philosophy, economics, and wealth
creation, he has proven the impact of his principles.
Today, Naval continues to build and invest in companies almost
casually, in his own artistic way, while maintaining a healthy,
peaceful, and balanced life. This book collects and organizes

the pieces of wisdom he has shared and shows you how to
achieve the same for yourself.
Navals life story is instructive. An introspective founder,
self-taught investor, capitalist, and engineer certainly has
something to teach us all.
As a first-principles thinker with no fear of speaking his truth,
Navals thoughts are often unique and thought-provoking. His
instinct for seeing through lifes veneer has changed how I see
the world.
IvelearnedanenormousamountfromNaval.Reading,listening,
and applying his principles of wealth and happiness has given
me calm confidence on my path and taught me to enjoy every
momentofthisjourney.Closelystudyinghiscareerhasshown
mehowgreatthingsareaccomplishedthroughsmall,persistent
steps, and how large an impact one individual can have.
I refer to his work often and recommend it to friends. Those
conversations inspired me to create this book, so people can
learn from his perspective whether theyre new to Navals ideas
or have followed him the past ten years.
This book collects the wisdom shared by Naval over the past
decade in his own words through Twitter, blog posts, and pod-
casts. With this book, you can get the benefits of a lifetime in
a few hours.
I created this book as a public service. Tweets, podcasts, and
interviews quickly get buried and lost. Knowledge this valu-
able deserves a more permanent, accessible format. That is
my mission with this book.
I hope this acts as an introduction to Navals ideas. Ive col-
lected his most powerful and useful ideas in his own words,
woven them into a readable thread, and organized those into
sections for easy reference.
I often find myself reviewing sections of this book before
making an investment or opening to the Happiness chapter if
Im feeling off. Creating this book has changed me. I feel more
clarity, confidence, and peace through all aspects of life. I hope
reading it will do the same for you.
The Almanack is intended as a guide to be read and consulted
for specific topics. If Naval doesnt answer your emails, I hope
this book gives you the next-best advice.
This book is an introduction to Naval and dives deeply into his
two most-explored topics: wealth and happiness. If you want
to continue exploring Naval and his other ideas, I encourage
you to check out the Next on Naval section at the end of this
book. Ive shared chapters that were edited out of the final
book, as well as other popular resources.
Be well,
Eric
TIMELINE OF
NAVAL RAVIKANT
 1974 - Born in Delhi, India
 1985 - Age 9 - Moved from New Delhi to Queens, NY
 1989 - Age 14 - Attended Stuyvesant High School
 1995 - Age 21 - Graduated Dartmouth (studied computer
science and economics)
 1999 - Age 25 - Founder/CEO of Epinions
 2001 - Age 27 - Venture Partner at August Capital
 2003 - Age 29 - Founder of Vast.com, a classified ad mar-
ketplace
 2005 - Age 30 - Is called Radioactive Mud in Silicon Valley
 2007 - Age 32 - Founded Hit Forge, a small VC fund origi-
nally conceived as an incubator
 2007 - Age 32 - Launched VentureHacks blog
 2010 - Age 34 - Launched AngelList
 2010 - Age 34 - Invested in Uber
 2012 - Age 36 - Lobbied Congress to get the JOBS Act passed
 2018 - Age 43 - Is named Angel Investor of the Year
NOW, HERE IS NAVAL
IN HIS OWN WORDS

BACKGROUND
I grew up in a single-parent household with my mom working,
going to school, and raising my brother and me as latchkey
kids. We were very self-sufficient from a very early age. There
was a lot of hardship, but everyone goes through hardship. It
did help me in a number of ways.
We were poor immigrants. My dad came to the UShe was a
pharmacist in India. But his degree wasnt accepted here, so
he worked in a hardware store. Not a great upbringing, you
know. My family split up. 
My mother uniquely provided, against the background of hard-
ship, unconditional and unfailing love. If you have nothing
in your life, but you have at least one person that loves you
unconditionally, itll do wonders for your self-esteem. 
We were in a part of New York City that isnt very safe. Basically,
the library was my after-school center. After I came back from
school, I would just go straight to the library and hang out
there until they closed. Then, I would come home. That was
my daily routine. 
We moved to the US when we were very young. I didnt have
many friends, so I wasnt very confident. I spent a lot of time
reading. My only real friends were books. Books make for great
friends, because the best thinkers of the last few thousand
years tell you their nuggets of wisdom. 
My first job was with an illegal catering company in the back
of a van delivering Indian food when I was fifteen. Even when
I was younger, I had a paper route and I washed dishes in the
cafeteria.
I was a totally unknown kid in New York City from a nothing
family, an immigrants trying to survive situation. Then, I
passed the test to get into Stuyvesant High School. That saved
my life, because once I had the Stuyvesant brand, I got into an
Ivy League college, which led me into tech. Stuyvesant is one
of those intelligence lottery situations where you can break in
with instant validation. You go from being blue collar to white
collar in one move. 
At Dartmouth, I studied economics and computer science.
There was a time when I thought I was going to be a PhD in
economics. 
Today, Im an investor, personally, in about two hundred com-
panies. Advisor to a bunch. Im on a bunch of boards. Im also
a small partner in a cryptocurrency fund because Im really
into the potential of cryptocurrencies. Im always cooking up
something new. I always have a bunch of side projects. 
All that, of course, in addition to being the founder and chair-
man of AngelList. 
I was born poor and miserable. Im now pretty well-off, and
Im very happy. I worked at those.
Ive learned a few things, and some principles. I try to lay them
out in a timeless manner, where you can figure it out for your-
self. Because at the end of the day, I cant quite teach anything.
I can only inspire you and maybe give you a few hooks so you
can remember. 

Live, on Twitter, its Naval (applause ensues)
On May 18th, 2007
PART I
WEALTH
How to get rich without getting lucky.
BUILDING WEALTH
Making money is not a thing you doits a skill you learn.

UNDERSTAND HOW WEALTH IS CREATED
I like to think that if I lost all my money and you dropped me
on a random street in any English-speaking country, within
five or ten years Id be wealthy again because its just a skillset
Ive developed that anyone can develop. 
Its not really about hard work. You can work in a restaurant
eighty hours a week, and youre not going to get rich. Getting
rich is about knowing what to do, who to do it with, and when
to do it. It is much more about understanding than purely hard
work. Yes, hard work matters, and you cant skimp on it. But
it has to be directed in the right way.
If you dont know yet what you should work on, the most
important thing is to figure it out. You should not grind at a
lot of hard work until you figure out what you should be work-
ing on.
I came up with the principles in my tweetstorm (below) for
myself when I was really young, around thirteen or fourteen.
Ive been carrying them in my head for thirty years, and Ive
been living them. Over time (sadly or fortunately), the thing I
got really good at was looking at businesses and figuring out
the point of maximum leverage to actually create wealth and
capture some of that created wealth.
This is exactly what I did my famous tweetstorm about. Of
course, every one of these tweets can be extrapolated into an
hours worth of conversation. The tweetstorm below is a good
starting point. The tweetstorm tries to be information-dense,
very concise, high-impact, and timeless. It has all the informa-
tion and principles, so if you absorb these and you work hard
over ten years, youll get what you want. 
How to Get Rich (Without Getting Lucky):

Seek wealth, not money or status. Wealth is having assets
that earn while you sleep. Money is how we transfer time
and wealth. Status is your place in the social hierarchy.

Understand ethical wealth creation is possible. If you secretly
despise wealth, it will elude you.

Ignore people playing status games. They gain status by
attacking people playing wealth creation games.

Youre not going to get rich renting out your time. You must
own equitya piece of a businessto gain your financial
freedom.

You will get rich by giving society what it wants but does not
yet know how to get. At scale.


Pick an industry where you can play long-term games with
long-term people.

The internet has massively broadened the possible space of
careers. Most people havent figured this out yet.

Play iterated games. All the returns in life, whether in wealth,
relationships, or knowledge, come from compound interest.

Pick business partners with high intelligence, energy, and,
above all, integrity.

Dont partner with cynics and pessimists. Their beliefs are
self-fulfilling.

Learn to sell. Learn to build. If you can do both, you will be
unstoppable.

Arm yourself with specific knowledge, accountability, and
leverage.

Specific knowledge is knowledge you cannot be trained for.
If society can train you, it can train someone else and replace
you.

Specific knowledge is found by pursuing your genuine
curiosity and passion rather than whatever is hot right now.

Building specific knowledge will feel like play to you but will
look like work to others.

When specific knowledge is taught, its through
apprenticeships, not schools.

Specific knowledge is often highly technical or creative. It
cannot be outsourced or automated.


Embrace accountability, and take business risks under your
own name. Society will reward you with responsibility, equity,
and leverage.

Give me a lever long enough and a place to stand, and I will
move the earth.
Archimedes

Fortunes require leverage. Business leverage comes from
capital, people, and products with no marginal cost of
replication (code and media).

Capital means money. To raise money, apply your specific
knowledge with accountability and show resulting good
judgment.

Labor means people working for you. Its the oldest and most
fought-over form of leverage. Labor leverage will impress
your parents, but dont waste your life chasing it.

Capital and labor are permissioned leverage. Everyone is
chasing capital, but someone has to give it to you. Everyone
is trying to lead, but someone has to follow you.

Code and media are permissionless leverage. Theyre the
leverage behind the newly rich. You can create software and
media that works for you while you sleep.

An army of robots is freely availableits just packed in data
centers for heat and space efficiency. Use it.

If you cant code, write books and blogs, record videos and
podcasts.

Leverage is a force multiplier for your judgment.

Judgment requires experience but can be built faster by
learning foundational skills.


There is no skill called business. Avoid business magazines
and business classes.

Study microeconomics, game theory, psychology, persuasion,
ethics, mathematics, and computers.

Reading is faster than listening. Doing is faster than watching.

You should be too busy to do coffee while still keeping an
uncluttered calendar.

Set and enforce an aspirational personal hourly rate. If
fixing a problem will save less than your hourly rate, ignore
it. If outsourcing a task will cost less than your hourly rate,
outsource it.

Work as hard as you can. Even though who you work with
and what you work on are more important than how hard
you work.

Become the best in the world at what you do. Keep
redefining what you do until this is true.

There are no get-rich-quick schemes. Those are just someone
else getting rich off you.

Apply specific knowledge, with leverage, and eventually you
will get what you deserve.

When youre finally wealthy, youll realize it wasnt what you
were seeking in the first place. But that is for another day. 
Summary: Productize Yourself
Your summary says Productize yourselfwhat does that
mean?
Productize and yourself. Yourself has uniqueness.
Productize has leverage. Yourself has accountability. Pro-
ductize has specific knowledge. Yourself also has specific
knowledge in there. So all of these pieces, you can combine
them into these two words.

If youre looking toward the long-term goal of getting wealthy,
you should ask yourself, Is this authentic to me? Is it myself
that I am projecting? And then, Am I productizing it? Am I
scaling it? Am I scaling with labor or with capital or with code
or with media? So its a very handy, simple mnemonic. 
This is hard. This is why I say it takes decadesIm not saying
it takes decades to execute, but the better part of a decade may
be figuring out what you can uniquely provide. 
Whats the difference between wealth and money?
Money is how we transfer wealth. Money is social credits. It
is the ability to have credits and debits of other peoples time.
If I do my job right, if I create value for society, society says, Oh,
thank you. We owe you something in the future for the work
you did in the past. Heres a little IOU. Lets call that money. 
Wealth is the thing you want. Wealth is assets that earn while
you sleep. Wealth is the factory, the robots, cranking out things.
Wealth is the computer program thats running at night, serv-
ing other customers. Wealth is even money in the bank that is
being reinvested into other assets, and into other businesses.
Even a house can be a form of wealth, because you can rent it
out, although thats probably a lower productivity use of land
than some commercial enterprise.
So, my definition of wealth is much more businesses and assets
that can earn while you sleep. 
Technology democratizes consumption but consolidates
production. The best person in the world at anything gets to
do it for everyone.
Society will pay you for creating things it wants. But society
doesnt yet know how to create those things, because if it did,
they wouldnt need you. They would already be stamped out.
Almost everything in your house, in your workplace, and on the
street used to be technology at one point in time. There was
a time when oil was a technology that made J.D. Rockefeller
rich. There was a time when cars were technology that made
Henry Ford rich.
So, technology is the set of things, as Alan Kay said, that dont
quite work yet [correction: Danny Hillis]. Once something
works, its no longer technology. Society always wants new
things. And if you want to be wealthy, you want to figure out
which one of those things you can provide for society that
it does not yet know how to get but it will want and provid-
ing it is natural to you, within your skill set, and within your
capabilities.
Then, you have to figure out how to scale it because if you only
build one, thats not enough. Youve got to build thousands,
or hundreds of thousands, or millions, or billions of them so
everybody can have one. Steve Jobs (and his team, of course)
figured out society would want smartphones. A computer in
their pocket that had all the phone capability times one hun-
dred and was easy to use. So, they figured out how to build it,
and then they figured out how to scale it. 

BECOME THE BEST IN THE WORLD AT WHAT YOU DO.
KEEP REDEFINING WHAT YOU DO UNTIL THIS IS TRUE.
FIND AND BUILD SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE
Sales skills are a form of specific knowledge.
Theres such a thing as a natural in sales. You run into them
all the time in startups and venture capital. When you meet
someone who is a natural at sales, you just know theyre
amazing. Theyre really good at what they do. That is a form
of specific knowledge.
Obviously they learned somewhere, but they didnt learn it in a
classroom setting. They learned probably in their childhood in
the school yard, or they learned negotiating with their parents.
Maybe some is a genetic component in the DNA.
But you can improve sales skills. You can read Robert Cialdini,
you can go to a sales training seminar, you can do door-to-door
sales. It is brutal but will train you very quickly. You can defi-
nitely improve your sales skills.
Specific knowledge cannot be taught, but it can be learned.
When I talk about specific knowledge, I mean figure out what
you were doing as a kid or teenager almost effortlessly. Some-
thing you didnt even consider a skill, but people around you
noticed. Your mother or your best friend growing up would
know.
Examples of what your specific knowledge could be:
 Sales skills
 Musical talents, with the ability to pick up any instrument
 An obsessive personality: you dive into things and remem-
ber them quickly
 Love for science fiction: you were into reading sci-fi, which
means you absorb a lot of knowledge very quickly
 Playing a lot of games, you understand game theory pretty
well
 Gossiping, digging into your friend network. That might
make you into a very interesting journalist.
The specific knowledge is sort of this weird combination of
unique traits from your DNA, your unique upbringing, and
your response to it. Its almost baked into your personality and
your identity. Then you can hone it.
No one can compete with you on being you.
Most of life is a search for who and what needs you the most.

For example, I love to read, and I love technology. I learn very
quickly, and I get bored fast. If I had gone into a profession
where I was required to tunnel down for twenty years into the
same topic, it wouldnt have worked. Im in venture investing,
which requires me to come up to speed very, very quickly on
new technologies (and Im rewarded for getting bored because
new technologies come along). It matches up pretty well with
my specific knowledge and skill sets. 
I wanted to be a scientist. That is where a lot of my moral hier-
archy comes from. I view scientists as being at the top of the
productionchainforhumanity.Thegroupofscientistswhohave
made real breakthroughs and contributions probably added
more to human society, I think, than any single other class of
humanbeings.Nottotakeawayanythingfromartorpoliticsor
engineeringorbusiness,butwithoutscience,wedstillbescram-
bling in the dirt fighting with sticks and trying to start fires.
Society, business, & money are downstream of technology,
which is itself downstream of science. Science applied is the
engine of humanity.
Corollary: Applied Scientists are the most powerful people in
the world. This will be more obvious in the coming years.
My whole value system was built around scientists, and I
wanted to be a great scientist. But when I actually look back at
what I was uniquely good at and what I ended up spending my
time doing, it was more around making money, tinkering with
technology, and selling people on things. Explaining things
and talking to people.
I have some sales skills, which is a form of specific knowledge.
I have some analytical skills on how to make money. And I
have this ability to absorb data, obsess about it, and break it
downthat is a specific skill that I have. I also love tinkering
with technology. And all of this stuff feels like play to me, but
it looks like work to others.
There are other people to whom these things would be hard,
and they say, Well, how do I get good at being pithy and sell-
ing ideas? Well, if youre not already good at it or if youre not
really into it, maybe its not your thingfocus on the thing
that you are really into.
The first person to actually point out my real specific knowl-
edge was my mother. She did it as an aside, talking from the
kitchen, and she said it when I was fifteen or sixteen years old.
I was telling a friend of mine that I want to be an astrophysi-
cist, and she said, No, youre going to go into business. I was
like, What, my moms telling me Im going to be in business?
Im going to be an astrophysicist. Mom doesnt know shes
talking about. But Mom knew exactly what she was talking
about. 
Specific knowledge is found much more by pursuing your
innate talents, your genuine curiosity, and your passion. Its
not by going to school for whatever is the hottest job; its not
by going into whatever field investors say is the hottest.
Very often, specific knowledge is at the edge of knowledge. Its
also stuff thats only now being figured out or is really hard to
figure out. If youre not 100 percent into it, somebody else who
is 100 percent into it will outperform you. And they wont just
outperform you by a little bittheyll outperform you by a lot

because now were operating the domain of ideas, compound
interest really applies and leverage really applies. 
The internet has massively broadened the possible space of
careers. Most people havent figured this out yet.
You can go on the internet, and you can find your audience.
And you can build a business, and create a product, and build
wealth, and make people happy just uniquely expressing your-
self through the internet. 
The internet enables any niche interest, as long as youre the
best person at it to scale out. And the great news is because
every human is different, everyone is the best at something
being themselves.
Another tweet I had that is worth weaving in, but didnt go into
the How to Get Rich tweetstorm, was very simple: Escape
competition through authenticity. Basically, when youre
competing with people, its because youre copying them. Its
because youre trying to do the same thing. But every human
is different. Dont copy. 
If you are fundamentally building and marketing something
that is an extension of who you are, no one can compete with
you on that. Whos going to compete with Joe Rogan or Scott
Adams? Its impossible. Is somebody else going to come along
and write a better Dilbert? No. Is someone going to compete
with Bill Watterson and create a better Calvin and Hobbes? No.
Theyre being authentic. 
The best jobs are neither decreed nor degreed. They are
creative expressions of continuous learners in free markets.
The most important skill for getting rich is becoming a perpet-
ual learner. You have to know how to learn anything you want
to learn. The old model of making money is going to school for
four years, getting your degree, and working as a professional
for thirty years. But things change fast now. Now, you have to
come up to speed on a new profession within nine months, and
its obsolete four years later. But within those three productive
years, you can get very wealthy.
Its much more important today to be able to become an expert
in a brand-new field in nine to twelve months than to have
studied the right thing a long time ago. You really care about
having studied the foundations, so youre not scared of any
book. If you go to the library and theres a book you cannot
understand, you have to dig down and say, What is the foun-
dation required for me to learn this? Foundations are super
important. 
Basic arithmetic and numeracy are way more important in life
than doing calculus. Similarly, being able to convey yourself
simply using ordinary English words is far more important
than being able to write poetry, having an extensive vocabulary,
or speaking seven different foreign languages.
Knowing how to be persuasive when speaking is far more
important than being an expert digital marketer or click opti-
mizer. Foundations are key. Its much better to be at 9/10 or
10/10 on foundations than to try and get super deep into things.

You do need to be deep in something because otherwise youll
be a mile wide and an inch deep and you wont get what you
want out of life. You can only achieve mastery in one or two
things. Its usually things youre obsessed about. 
ALL
THE
RETURNS
IN
LIFE,
WHETHER
IN
WEALTH,
RELATIONSHIPS,
OR
KNOWLEDGE,
COME
FROM
COMPOUND
INTEREST.
PLAY LONG-TERM GAMES.
PLAY LONG-TERM GAMES WITH LONG-TERM PEOPLE
You said, All the returns in life, whether in wealth, relation-
ships, or knowledge, come from compound interest. How
does one know if theyre earning compound interest?
Compound interest is a very powerful concept. Compound
interest applies to more than just compounding capital. Com-
pounding capital is just the beginning.
Compounding in business relationships is very important.
Look at some of the top roles in society, like why someone is
a CEO of a public company or managing billions of dollars.
Its because people trust them. They are trusted because the
relationships theyve built and the work theyve done has
compounded. Theyve stuck with the business and shown
themselves (in a visible and accountable way) to be high-
integrity people.
Compound interest also happens in your reputation. If you
have a sterling reputation and you keep building it for decades
upon decades, people will notice. Your reputation will literally
end up being thousands or tens of thousands of times more
valuable than somebody else who was very talented but is not
keeping the compound interest in reputation going.
This is also true when youre working with individual people. If
youve worked with somebody for five or ten years and you still
enjoy working with them, obviously you trust them, and the
little foibles are gone. All the normal negotiations in business
relationships can work very simply because you trust each
otheryou know it will work out.
For example, theres another Angel in Silicon Valley named
Elad Gil who I like to do deals with.
I love working with Elad because I know when the deal is being
done, he will bend over backward to give me extra. He will
always round off in my favor if theres an extra dollar being

delivered here or there. If theres some cost to pay, he will pay
it out of his own pocket, and he wont even mention it to me.
Because he goes so far out of his way to treat me so well, I send
him every deal I haveI try to include him in everything. Then,
I go out of my way to try and pay for him. Compounding in
those relationships is very valuable. 
Intentions dont matter. Actions do. Thats why being ethical
is hard.
When you find the right thing to do, when you find the right
people to work with, invest deeply. Sticking with it for decades
isreallyhowyoumakethebigreturnsinyourrelationshipsand
in your money. So, compound interest is very important. 
99% of effort is wasted.
Obviously, nothing is ever completely wasted because its all a
learning moment. You can learn from anything. But for exam-
ple, when you go back to school, 99 percent of the term papers
you did, books you read, exercises you did, things you learned,
they dont really apply. You might have read geography and
history you never reuse. You might have studied a language
you dont speak anymore. You might have studied a branch of
mathematics you completely forgot.
Of course, these are learning experiences. You did learn. You
learned the value of hard work; you might have learned some-
thing that went deep into your psyche and became a piece of
what youre doing now. But at least when it comes to the goal-
oriented life, only about 1 percent of the efforts you made paid
off.
Another example is all the people you dated until you met
your husband or wife. It was wasted time in the goal sense.
Not wasted in the exponential sense, not wasted in the learning
sense, but definitely wasted in the goal sense.
The reason I say this is not to make some glib comment about
how 99 percent of your life is wasted and only 1 percent is
useful. I say this because you should be very thoughtful and
realize in most things (relationships, work, even in learning)
what youre trying to do is find the thing you can go all-in on
to earn compound interest.
When youre dating, the instant you know this relationship
is not going to be the one that leads to marriage, you should
probably move on. When youre studying something, like a
geography or history class, and you realize you are never going
to use the information, drop the class. Its a waste of time. Its
a waste of your brain energy.
Im not saying dont do the 99 percent, because its very hard
to identify what the 1 percent is. What Im saying is: when you
find the 1 percent of your discipline which will not be wasted,
which youll be able to invest in for the rest of your life and
has meaning to yougo all-in and forget about the rest. 

INTENTIONS DONT MATTER.
ACTIONS DO.
TAKE ON ACCOUNTABILITY
Embrace accountability and take business risks under your
own name. Society will reward you with responsibility, equity,
and leverage.
To get rich, you need leverage. Leverage comes in labor, comes
in capital, or it can come through code or media. But most of
these, like labor and capital, people have to give to you. For
labor, somebody has to follow you. For capital, somebody has
to give you money, assets to manage, or machines.
So to get these things, you have to build credibility, and you
have to do it under your own name as much as possible, which
is risky. So, accountability is a double-edged thing. It allows
you to take credit when things go well and to bear the brunt
of the failure when things go badly. 
Clear accountability is important. Without accountability, you
dont have incentives. Without accountability, you cant build
credibility. But you take risks. You risk failure. You risk humil-
iation. You risk failure under your own name.
Luckily, in modern society, theres no more debtors prison
and people arent imprisoned or executed for losing other
peoples money, but were still socially hardwired to not fail
in public under our own names. The people who have the
ability to fail in public under their own names actually gain
a lot of power.
Ill give a personal anecdote. Up until about 2013, 2014, my
public persona was entirely around startups and investing.
Only around 2014, 2015 did I start talking about philosophy
and psychological things and broader things. It made me a
little nervous because I was doing it under my own name.
There were definitely people in the industry who sent me
messages through the backchannel like, What are you doing?
Youre ending your career. This is stupid.
I kind of just went with it. I took a risk. Same with crypto. Early
on, I took a risk. But when you put your name out there, you
take a risk with certain things. You also get to reap the rewards.
You get the benefits. 
In the old days, the captain was expected to go down with the
ship. If the ship was sinking, then literally the last person to
get off was the captain. Accountability does come with real
risks, but were talking about a business context.

The risk here would be you would probably be the last one to
get your capital back out. Youd be the last one to get paid for
your time. The time that you put in, the capital you put into
the company, these are at risk. 
Realize that in modern society, the downside risk is not that
large. Even personal bankruptcy can wipe the debts clean in
good ecosystems. Im most familiar with Silicon Valley, but
generally, people will forgive failures as long as you were
honest and made a high-integrity effort.
Theres not really that much to fear in terms of failure, and
so people should take on a lot more accountability than they
do. 
KNOWLEDGE
ALLOCATION
BUILD OR BUY EQUITY IN A BUSINESS
If you dont own a piece of a business, you dont have a path
towards financial freedom.
Why is owning equity in a business important to becoming
rich?
Its ownership versus wage work. If you are paid for rent-
ing out your time, even lawyers and doctors, you can make
some money, but youre not going to make the money that
gives you financial freedom. Youre not going to have passive
income where a business is earning for you while you are on
vacation. 
This is probably one of the most important points. People seem
to think you can create wealthmake money through work.
Its probably not going to work. There are many reasons for
that.
Without ownership, your inputs are very closely tied to your
outputs. In almost any salaried job, even one paying a lot per
hour like a lawyer or a doctor, youre still putting in the hours,
and every hour you get paid.
Without ownership, when youre sleeping, youre not earn-
ing. When youre retired, youre not earning. When youre on
vacation, youre not earning. And you cant earn nonlinearly.
If you look at even doctors who get rich (like really rich), its
because they open a business. They open a private practice.
The private practice builds a brand, and the brand attracts

people. Or they build some kind of a medical device, a proce-
dure, or a process with an intellectual property.
Essentially, youre working for somebody else, and that person
is taking on the risk and has the accountability, the intellectual
property, and the brand. Theyre not going to pay you enough.
Theyre going to pay you the bare minimum they have to, to
get you to do their job. That can be a high bare minimum, but
its still not going to be true wealth where youre retired but
still earning. 
Owning equity in a company basically means you own the
upside. When you own debt, you own guaranteed revenue
streams and you own the downside. You want to own equity.
If you dont own equity in a business, your odds of making
money are very slim.
You have to work up to the point where you can own equity in
a business. You could own equity as a small shareholder where
you bought stock. You could also own it as an owner where
you started the company. Ownership is really important. 
Everybody who really makes money at some point owns a piece
of a product, a business, or some IP. That can be through stock
options if you work at a tech company. Thats a fine way to start.
But usually, the real wealth is created by starting your own
companies or even by investing. In an investment firm, theyre
buying equity. These are the routes to wealth. It doesnt come
through the hours. 
LEVERAGE
1X 1,000X 10,000X
FIND A POSITION OF LEVERAGE
We live in an age of infinite leverage, and the economic rewards
for genuine intellectual curiosity have never been higher. 
Following your genuine intellectual curiosity is a better foun-
dation for a career than following whatever is making money
right now. 
Knowledge only you know or only a small set of people knows
is going to come out of your passions and your hobbies, oddly

enough. If you have hobbies around your intellectual curiosity,
youre more likely to develop these passions. 
If it entertains you now but will bore you someday, its a
distraction. Keep looking.
I only really want to do things for their own sake. That is one
definition of art. Whether its business, exercise, romance,
friendship, whatever, I think the meaning of life is to do things
for their own sake. Ironically, when you do things for their own
sake, you create your best work. Even if youre just trying to
make money, you will actually be the most successful.
The year I generated the most wealth for myself was actually
the year I worked the least hard and cared the least about the
future. I was mostly doing things for the sheer fun of it. I was
basically telling people, Im retired, Im not working. Then,
I had the time for whatever was my highest valued project in
front of me. By doing things for their own sake, I did them at
their best. 
The less you want something, the less youre thinking about it,
the less youre obsessing over it, the more youre going to do
it in a natural way. The more youre going to do it for yourself.
Youre going to do it in a way youre good at, and youre going
to stick with it. The people around you will see the quality of
your work is higher. 
Follow your intellectual curiosity more than whatever is hot
right now. If your curiosity ever leads you to a place where soci-
ety eventually wants to go, youll get paid extremely well. 
Youre more likely to have skills society does not yet know how
to train other people to do. If someone can train other people
how to do something, then they can replace you. If they can
replace you, then they dont have to pay you a lot. You want to
know how to do something other people dont know how to do
at the time period when those skills are in demand. 
If they can train you to do it, then eventually they will train a
computer to do it.
You get rewarded by society for giving it what it wants and
doesnt know how to get elsewhere. A lot of people think you
can go to school and study for how to make money, but the
reality is, theres no skill called business. 
Think about what product or service society wants but does
not yet know how to get. You want to become the person who
delivers it and delivers it at scale. That is really the challenge
of how to make money.
Now, the problem is becoming good at whatever it is. It
moves around from generation to generation, but a lot of it
happens to be in technology.
You are waiting for your moment when something emerges in
the world, they need a skill set, and youre uniquely qualified.
You build your brand in the meantime on Twitter, on YouTube,
and by giving away free work. You make a name for yourself,
and you take some risk in the process. When it is time to move

on the opportunity, you can do so with leveragethe maxi-
mum leverage possible. 
There are three broad classes of leverage:
One form of leverage is laborother humans working for you.
It is the oldest form of leverage, and actually not a great one in
the modern world.  I would argue this is the worst form of
leverage that you could possibly use. Managing other people
is incredibly messy. It requires tremendous leadership skills.
Youre one short hop from a mutiny or getting eaten or torn
apart by the mob. 
Money is good as a form of leverage. It means every time you
make a decision, you multiply it with money.  Capital is a
trickier form of leverage to use. Its more modern. Its the one
that people have used to get fabulously wealthy in the last cen-
tury. Its probably been the dominant form of leverage in the
last century.
You can see this by looking for the richest people. Its bankers,
politicians in corrupt countries who print money, essentially
people who move large amounts of money around. If you
look at the top of very large companies, outside of technology
companies, in many, many large old companies, the CEO job
is really a financial job.
It scales very, very well. If you get good at managing capital, you
can manage more and more capital much more easily than you
can manage more and more people. 
The final form of leverage is brand newthe most democratic
form. It is: products with no marginal cost of replication.
This includes books, media, movies, and code. Code is probably
the most powerful form of permissionless leverage. All you
need is a computeryou dont need anyones permission. 
Forget rich versus poor, white-collar versus blue. Its now
leveraged versus un-leveraged.
The most interesting and the most important form of leverage
is the idea of products that have no marginal cost of replication.
This is the new form of leverage. This was only invented in the
last few hundred years. It started with the printing press. It
accelerated with broadcast media, and now its really blown up
with the internet and with coding. Now, you can multiply your
efforts without involving other humans and without needing
money from other humans.
This book is a form of leverage. Long ago, I would have had to
sit in a lecture hall and lecture each of you personally. I would
have maybe reached a few hundred people, and that would
have been that. 
This newest form of leverage is where all the new fortunes are
made, all the new billionaires. For the last generation, fortunes
were made by capital. The people who made fortunes were the
Warren Buffetts of the world.
But the new generations fortunes are all made through code
or media. Joe Rogan making $50 million to $100 million a year
from his podcast. Youre going to have PewDiePie. I dont know
how much money hes rolling in, but hes bigger than the news.
And of course, theres Jeff Bezos, Mark Zuckerberg, Larry Page,

Sergey Brin, Bill Gates, and Steve Jobs. Their wealth is all code-
based leverage. 
Probably the most interesting thing to keep in mind about
new forms of leverage is they are permissionless. They dont
require somebody elses permission for you to use them or
succeed. For labor leverage, somebody has to decide to follow
you. For capital leverage, somebody has to give you money to
invest or to turn into a product.
Coding, writing books, recording podcasts, tweeting, You-
Tubingthese kinds of things are permissionless. You dont
need anyones permission to do them, and thats why they
are very egalitarian. Theyre great equalizers of leverage. 
Every great software developer, for example, now has an
army of robots working for him at nighttime while he or
she sleeps, after theyve written the code, and its cranking
away. 
Youre never going to get rich renting out your time.
Whenever you can in life, optimize for independence rather
than pay. If you have independence and youre accountable on
your output, as opposed to your inputthats the dream. 
Humans evolved in societies where there was no leverage. If I
was chopping wood or carrying water for you, you knew eight
hours put in would be equal to about eight hours of output.
Now weve invented leveragethrough capital, cooperation,
technology, productivity, all these means. We live in an age of
leverage. As a worker, you want to be as leveraged as possible
so you have a huge impact without as much time or physical
effort.
A leveraged worker can out-produce a non-leveraged worker
by a factor of one thousand or ten thousand. With a leveraged
worker, judgment is far more important than how much time
they put in or how hard they work.
Forget 10x programmers. 1,000x programmers really exist,
we just dont fully acknowledge it. See @ID_AA_Carmack,
@notch, Satoshi Nakomoto, etc.
For example, a good software engineer, just by writing the
right little piece of code and creating the right little applica-
tion, can literally create half a billion dollars worth of value
for a company. But ten engineers working ten times as hard,
just because they choose the wrong model, the wrong prod-
uct, wrote it the wrong way, or put in the wrong viral loop,
have basically wasted their time. Inputs dont match outputs,
especially for leveraged workers.
What you want in life is to be in control of your time. You want
to get into a leveraged job where you control your own time
and youre tracked on the outputs. If you do something incred-
ible to move the needle on the business, they have to pay you.
Especially if they dont know how you did it because its innate
to your obsession or your skill or your innate abilities, theyre
going to have to keep paying you to do it.
If you have specific knowledge, you have accountability and
you have leverage; they have to pay you what youre worth. If

they pay you what youre worth, then you can get your time
backyou can be hyper-efficient. Youre not doing meetings
for meetings sake, youre not trying to impress other people,
youre not writing things down to make it look like you did
work. All you care about is the actual work itself.
When you do just the actual work itself, youll be far more
productive, far more efficient. Youll work when you feel
like itwhen youre high-energyand you wont be trying
to struggle through when youre low energy. Youll gain your
time back.
Forty hour work weeks are a relic of the Industrial Age.
Knowledge workers function like athletestrain and sprint,
then rest and reassess.
Sales is an exampleespecially very high-end sales. If youre
a real estate agent out there selling houses, its not a great job,
necessarily. Its very crowded. But if youre a top-tier real estate
agent, you know how to market yourself and you know how to
sell houses, its possible you could sell $5 million mansions in
one tenth of the time while somebody else is struggling to sell
$100,000 apartments or condos. Real estate agent is a job with
input and output disconnected.
Building any product and selling any product fits this descrip-
tion. And fundamentally, what else is there? Where you dont
necessarily want to be is a support role, like customer ser-
vice. In customer service, unfortunately, inputs and outputs
relate relatively close to each other, and the hours you put in
matter. 
Tools and leverage create this disconnection between inputs
and outputs. The higher the creativity component of a pro-
fession, the more likely it is to have disconnected inputs and
outputs. If youre looking at professions where your inputs and
your outputs are highly connected, its going to be very hard to
create wealth and make wealth for yourself in that process. 
If you want to be part of a great tech company, then you
need to be able to SELL or BUILD. If you dont do either,
learn.
Learn to sell, learn to build. If you can do both, you will be
unstoppable.
These are two very broad categories. One is building the prod-
uct. This is hard, and its multivariate. It can include design; it
can include development; it can include manufacturing, logis-
tics, procurement; and it can even be designing and operating
a service. It has many, many definitions.
But in every industry, there is a definition of the builder. In our
tech industry, its the CTO, its the programmer, its the soft-
ware engineer or hardware engineer. But even in the laundry
business, it could be the person whos building the laundry
service, who is making the trains run on time, whos making
sure all the clothes end up in the right place at the right time,
and so on.
The other side of it is sales. Again, selling has a very broad
definition. Selling doesnt necessarily just mean selling to
individual customers, but it can mean marketing, it can mean

communicating, it can mean recruiting, it can mean raising
money, it can mean inspiring people, it could mean doing PR.
Its a broad umbrella category. 
Earn with your mind, not your time.
Lets talk more about the real estate business. The worst kind
of job is someone whos doing labor to repair a house. Maybe
you get paid ten dollars or twenty dollars an hour. You go to
peoples houses, your boss demands youre there at 8:00 a.m.,
and you repair your piece of the house. Here, you have zero
leverage. You have some accountability, but not really, because
your accountability is to your boss, not to the client. You dont
have any real specific knowledge, since what youre doing is
labor lots of people can do. Youre not going to get paid a lot.
Youre getting paid minimum wage plus a little bit for your skill
and your time.
The next level up might be the general contractor working on
the house for the owner. They may be getting paid $50,000
to do the whole project, then theyre paying the labor fifteen
dollars an hour and theyre keeping the difference.
A general contractor is obviously a better place to be. But
how do we measure it? How do we know its better? Well, we
know its better because this person has some accountabil-
ity. Theyre responsible for the outcome, they have to sweat
at night if things arent working. Contractors have leverage
through laborers working for them. They also have little bit
more specific knowledge: how to organize a team, make them
show up on time, and how to deal with city regulations.
The next level up might be a real estate developer. A developer
is someone whos going to buy a property, hire a bunch of con-
tractors, and transform it into something higher value. They
probablyhavetotakeoutaloantobuyahouseorgotoinvestors
to raise money. They buy the old house, tear it down, rebuild
it, and sell it. Instead of $50,000 like the general contractor, or
fifteen dollars an hour like the laborer, the developer might
be able to make a million dollars or half a million dollars in
profit when they sell the house for more than they bought it for,
includingtheexpensesofconstruction.Butnow,noticewhatis
required from the developer: a very high level of accountability.
The developer takes on more risk, more accountability, has
more leverage, and needs to have more specific knowledge.
They need to understand fundraising, city regulations, where
the real estate market is headed, and whether they should take
the risk or not. It is more difficult.
The next level up might be someone whos managing money in
a real estate fund. They have an enormous amount of capital
leverage. Theyre dealing with lots and lots of developers, and
theyre buying huge amounts of housing inventory. 
One level beyond that might be somebody who says, Actually,
I want to bring the maximum leverage to bear in this market
and the maximum specific knowledge. That person would say,
Well, I understand real estate, and I understand everything
from basic housing construction, to building properties and
selling them, to how real estate markets move and thrive, and I
also understand the technology business. I understand how to
recruit developers, how to write code, and how to build a good
product, and I understand how to raise money from venture
capitalists, how to return it, and how all of that works.

Obviously, not a single person may know this. You may pull
a team together to do it where each have different skill sets,
but that combined entity would have specific knowledge in
technology and in real estate. It would have massive account-
ability because that companys name would be a very high-risk,
high-reward effort attached to the whole thing, and people
would devote their lives to it and take on significant risk. It
would have leverage in code with lots of developers. It would
have capital with investors putting money in and the founders
own capital. It would have some of the highest-quality labor
you can find, which is high-quality engineers, designers, and
marketers who are working on the company.
Then, you may end up with a Trulia, Redfin, or Zillow company,
and then the upside could potentially be in the billions of dol-
lars, or the hundreds of millions of dollars. 
Each level has increasing leverage, increasing accountability,
increasingly specific knowledge. Youre adding in money-
based leverage on top of labor-based leverage. Adding in
code-based leverage on top of money and labor allows you to
actually create something bigger and bigger and get closer and
closer to owning all the upside, not just being paid a salary.
You start as a salaried employee. But you want to work your way
up to try and get higher leverage, more accountability, and spe-
cific knowledge. The combination of those over a long period
of time with the magic of compound interest will make you
wealthy. 
The one thing you have to avoid is the risk of ruin.
Avoiding ruin means stay out of jail. So, dont do anything ille-
gal. Its never worth it to wear an orange jumpsuit. Stay out of
total catastrophic loss. Avoiding ruin could also mean you stay
out of things that could be physically dangerous or hurt your
body. You have to watch your health.
Stay out of things that could cause you to lose all of your capital,
all of your savings. Dont gamble everything on one go. Instead,
take rationally optimistic bets with big upsides. 
EARN WITH YOUR MIND,
NOT YOUR TIME.
GET PAID FOR YOUR JUDGMENT
Choosing what kinds of jobs, careers, or fields you get into and
what sort of deals youre willing to take from your employer
will give you much more free time. Then, you dont have to

worry as much about time management. I would love to be
paid purely for my judgment, not for any work. I want a robot,
capital, or computer to do the work, but I want to be paid for
my judgment. 
I think every human should aspire to being knowledgeable
about certain things and being paid for our unique knowl-
edge. We have as much leverage as is possible in our business,
whether its through robots or computers or what have you.
Then, we can be masters of our own time because we are just
being tracked on outputs and not inputs.
Imagine someone comes along who demonstrably has slightly
better judgment. Theyre right 85 percent of the time instead of
75 percent. You will pay them $50 million, $100 million, $200
million, whatever it takes, because 10 percent better judgment
steering a $100 billion ship is very valuable. CEOs are highly
paid because of their leverage. Small differences in judgment
and capability really get amplified. 
Demonstrated judgmentcredibility around the judgment
is so critical. Warren Buffett wins here because he has massive
credibility. Hes been highly accountable. Hes been right over
and over in the public domain. Hes built a reputation for very
high integrity, so you can trust him. People will throw infinite
leverage behind him because of his judgment. Nobody asks
him how hard he works. Nobody asks him when he wakes up
or when he goes to sleep. Theyre like, Warren, just do your
thing.
Judgmentespecially demonstrated judgment, with high
accountability and a clear track recordis critical. 
We waste our time with short-term thinking and busywork.
Warren Buffett spends a year deciding and a day acting.
That act lasts decades.
Just from being marginally better, like running a quarter
mile a fraction of a second faster, some people get paid a lot
moreorders of magnitude more. Leverage magnifies those
differences even more. Being at the extreme in your art is very
important in the age of leverage. 
SOLVE VIA ITERATION.
THEN GET PAID VIA REPETITION.
PRIORITIZE AND FOCUS
Ive encountered plenty of bad luck along the way. The first
little fortune I made I instantly lost in the stock market. The
second little fortune I made, or should have made, I basically

got cheated out of by my business partners. Its only the third
time around that has been a charm.
Even then, it has been a slow and steady struggle. I havent
made money in my life in one giant payout. It has always been
a whole bunch of small things piling up. Its more about con-
sistently creating wealth by creating businesses, creating
opportunities, and creating investments. It hasnt been a
giant one-off thing. My personal wealth has not been gener-
ated by one big year. It just stacks up a little bit, a few chips
at a time: more options, more businesses, more investments,
more things I can do.
Thanks to the internet, opportunities are massively abundant.
In fact, I have too many ways to make money. I dont have
enough time. I literally have opportunities pouring out of my
ears, and I keep running out of time. There are so many ways
to create wealth, to create products, to create businesses, and
to get paid by society as a byproduct. I just cant handle them
all. 
Value your time at an hourly rate, and ruthlessly spend to
save time at that rate. You will never be worth more than you
think youre worth.
No one is going to value you more than you value yourself. You
just have to set a very high personal hourly rate and you have
to stick to it. Even when I was young, I just decided I was worth
a lot more than the market thought I was worth, and I started
treating myself that way.
Always factor your time into every decision. How much time
does it take? Its going to take you an hour to get across town
to get something. If you value yourself at one hundred dollars
an hour, thats basically throwing one hundred dollars out of
your pocket. Are you going to do that? 
Fast-forward to your wealthy self and pick some intermediate
hourly rate. For me, believe it or not, back when you could have
hired meWhich now obviously you cant, but back when you
could have hired methis was true a decade ago or even two
decades ago, before I had any real money. My hourly rate, I used
to say to myself over and over, is $5,000 an hour. Today when
I look back, really it was about $1,000 an hour.
Of course, I still ended up doing stupid things like arguing with
the electrician or returning the broken speaker, but I shouldnt
have, and I did a lot less than any of my friends would. I would
make a theatrical show out of throwing something in the trash
pile or giving it to Salvation Army rather than trying to return
it or handing something to people rather than trying to fix it.
I would argue with my girlfriends, and even today its my wife,
I dont do that. Thats not a problem that I solve. I still argue
that with my mother when she hands me little to-dos. I just
dont do that. I would rather hire you an assistant. This was
true even when I didnt have money. 
Another way of thinking about something is, if you can out-
sourcesomethingornotdosomethingforlessthanyourhourly
rate, outsource it or dont do it. If you can hire someone to do
it for less than your hourly rate, hire them. That even includes
things like cooking. You may want to eat your healthy home
cooked meals, but if you can outsource it, do that instead. 

Set a very high hourly aspirational rate for yourself and stick
to it. It should seem and feel absurdly high. If it doesnt, its not
high enough. Whatever you picked, my advice to you would be
to raise it. Like I said, for myself, even before I had money, for
the longest time I used $5,000 an hour. And if you extrapolate
that out into what it looks like as an annual salary, its multiple
millions of dollars per year.
Ironically, I actually think Ive beaten it. Im not the hardest
working personIm actually a lazy person. I work through
bursts of energy where Im really motivated with something.
If I actually look at how much Ive earned per actual hour that
Ive put in, its probably quite a bit higher than that. 
Can you expand on your statement, If you secretly despise
wealth, it will elude you?
If you get into a relative mindset, youre always going to hate
people who do better than you, youre always going to be jeal-
ous or envious of them. Theyll sense those feelings when you
try and do business with them. When you try and do business
with somebody, if you have any bad thoughts or any judgments
about them, they will feel it. Humans are wired to feel what
the other person deep down inside feels. You have to get out
of a relative mindset. 
Literally, being anti-wealth will prevent you from becoming
wealthy, because you will not have the right mindset for it,
you wont have the right spirit, and you wont be dealing with
people on the right level. Be optimistic, be positive. Its import-
ant. Optimists actually do better in the long run. 
The business world has many people playing zero sum
games and a few playing positive sum games searching for
each other in the crowd.
There are fundamentally two huge games in life that people
play. One is the money game. Because money is not going to
solve all of your problems, but its going to solve all of your
money problems. People realize that, so they want to make
money.
But at the same time, many of them, deep down, believe they
cant make money. They dont want any wealth creation to
happen. So, they attack the whole enterprise by saying, Well,
making money is evil. You shouldnt do it.
But theyre actually playing the other game, which is the
status game. Theyre trying to be high status in the eyes of
other people watching by saying, Well, I dont need money.
We dont want money. Status is your ranking in the social
hierarchy. 
Wealth creation is an evolutionarily recent positive-sum
game. Status is an old zero-sum game. Those attacking
wealth creation are often just seeking status.
Status is a zero-sum game. Its a very old game. Weve been
playing it since monkey tribes. Its hierarchical. Whos number
one? Whos number two? Whos number three? And for
number three to move to number two, number two has to
move out of that slot. So, status is a zero-sum game.

Politics is an example of a status game. Even sports are an
example of a status game. To be the winner, there must be a
loser. I dont fundamentally love status games. They play an
important role in our society, so we can figure out whos in
charge. But fundamentally, you play them because theyre a
necessary evil. 
The problem is, to win at a status game, you have to put some-
body else down. Thats why you should avoid status games in
your lifethey make you into an angry, combative person.
Youre always fighting to put other people down, to put your-
self and the people you like up.
Status games are always going to exist. Theres no way around
it, but realize most of the time, when youre trying to create
wealth and youre getting attacked by someone else, theyre
trying to increase their own status at your expense. Theyre
playing a different game. And its a worse game. Its a zero-sum
game instead of a positive-sum game. 
Play stupid games, win stupid prizes.
What is the most important thing to do for younger people
starting out?
Spend more time making the big decisions. There are basically
three really big decisions you make in your early life: where
you live, who youre with, and what you do.
We spend very little time deciding which relationship to get
into. We spend so much time in a job, but we spend so little
time deciding which job to get into. Choosing what city to live in
canalmostcompletelydeterminethetrajectoryofyourlife,but
we spend so little time trying to figure out what city to live in.
Advice to a young engineer considering moving to San
Francisco: Do you want to leave your friends behind? Or be
the one left behind?
If youre going to live in a city for ten years, if youre going to
be in a job for five years, if youre in a relationship for a decade,
you should be spending one to two years deciding these things.
These are highly dominating decisions. Those three decisions
really matter.
You have to say no to everything and free up your time so you
can solve the important problems. Those three are probably
the three biggest ones. 
What are one or two steps youd take to surround yourself
with successful people?
Figure out what youre good at, and start helping other people
with it. Give it away. Pay it forward. Karma works because
people are consistent. On a long enough timescale, you will
attract what you project. But dont measureyour patience
will run out if you count. 
An old boss once warned: Youll never be rich since youre
obviously smart, and someone will always offer you a job
thats just good enough.

How did you decide to start your first company?
I was working at this tech company called @Home Network,
and I told everybody around memy boss, coworkers, my
friends, In Silicon Valley, all of these other people are start-
ing companies. It looks like they can do it. Im going to start
a company. Im just here temporarily. Im an entrepreneur.
I didnt actually mean to trick myself into it. It wasnt a delib-
erate, calculated thing.
I was just venting, talking out loud, being overly honest. But
I didnt actually start a company. This was in 1996, it was a
much scarier, more difficult proposition to start a company
then. Sure enough, everyone started saying What are you still
doing here? I thought you were leaving to start a company?
and Wow, youre still here I was literally embarrassed into
starting my own company. 
Yes, I know some people arent necessarily ready to be entre-
preneurs, but long-term, where did we come up with this
idea the correct logical thing to do is for everybody to work
for somebody else? It is a very hierarchical model. 
FIND WORK THAT FEELS LIKE PLAY
Humans evolved as hunters and gatherers where we all
worked for ourselves. Its only at the beginning of agriculture
we became more hierarchical. The Industrial Revolution and
factories made us extremely hierarchical because one indi-
vidual couldnt necessarily own or build a factory, but now,
thanks to the internet, were going back to an age where more
and more people can work for themselves. I would rather be a
failed entrepreneur than someone who never tried. Because
even a failed entrepreneur has the skill set to make it on their
own. 
There are almost 7 billion people on this planet. Someday, I
hope, there will be almost 7 billion companies.
I learned how to make money because it was a necessity. After
it stopped being a necessity, I stopped caring about it. At least
for me, work was a means to an end. Making money was a
means to an end. Im much more interested in solving prob-
lems than I am in making money.
Any end goal will just lead to another goal, lead to another goal.
We just play games in life. When you grow up, youre playing
the school game, or youre playing the social game. Then youre
playing the money game, and then youre playing the status
game. These games just have longer and longer and longer-
lived horizons. At some point, at least I believe, these are all
just games. These are games where the outcome really stops
mattering once you see through the game.
Then you just get tired of games. I would say Im at the stage
where Im just tired of games. I dont think there is any end
goal or purpose. Im just living life as I want to. Im literally
just doing it moment to moment.
I want to be off the hedonic treadmill. 
What you really want is freedom. You want freedom from your
money problems, right? I think thats okay. Once you can solve

your money problems, either by lowering your lifestyle or by
making enough money, you want to retire. Not retirement at
sixty-five years old, sitting in a nursing home collecting a check
retirementits a different definition.
What is your definition of retirement?
Retirement is when you stop sacrificing today for an imagi-
nary tomorrow. When today is complete, in and of itself, youre
retired.
How do you get there?
Well, one way is to have so much money saved that your passive
income (without you lifting a finger) covers your burn rate.
A second is you just drive your burn rate down to zeroyou
become a monk.
A third is youre doing something you love. You enjoy it so
much, its not about the money. So there are multiple ways
to retirement.
The way to get out of the competition trap is to be authen-
tic, to find the thing you know how to do better than anybody.
You know how to do it better because you love it, and no one
can compete with you. If you love to do it, be authentic, and
then figure out how to map that to what society actually wants.
Apply some leverage and put your name on it. You take the
risks, but you gain the rewards, have ownership and equity in
what youre doing, and just crank it up. 
Did your motivation to earn money drop after you become
financially independent?
Yes and no. It did in the sense the desperation was gone.
But if anything, creating businesses and making money are
now more of an art. 
Whether in commerce, science, or politicshistory
remembers the artists.
Art is creativity. Art is anything done for its own sake. What are
the things that are done for their own sake, and theres nothing
behind them? Loving somebody, creating something, playing.
To me, creating businesses is play. I create businesses because
its fun, because Im into the product. 
I can create a new business within three months: raise the
money, assemble a team, and launch it. Its fun for me. Its really
cool to see what can I put together. It makes money almost as
a side effect. Creating businesses is the game I became good at.
Its just my motivation has shifted from being goal-oriented to
being artistic. Ironically, I think Im much better at it now. 
Even when I invest, its because I like the people involved, I like
hanging out with them, I learn from them, I think the prod-
uct is really cool. These days, I will pass on great investments
because I dont find the products interesting.
These are not 100 percent-or-nothing things. You can start
moving more and more toward that goal in your life. Its a goal.

When I was younger, I used to be so desperate to make money
that I would have done anything. If youd shown up and said,
Hey, Ive got a sewage trucking business, want to go into that?
I would have said, Great, I want to make money! Thank God
no one gave me that opportunity. Im glad I went down the
road of technology and science, which I genuinely enjoy. I got
to combine my vocation and my avocation.
Im always working. It looks like work to others, but it feels
like play to me. And thats how I know no one can compete
with me on it. Because Im just playing, for sixteen hours a
day. If others want to compete with me, theyre going to work,
and theyre going to lose because theyre not going to do it for
sixteen hours a day, seven days a week. 
Whatwasyourfigurewhereyouthoughtyouwerefinancially
safe?
Money is not the root of all evil; theres nothing evil about it.
But the lust for money is bad. The lust for money is not bad in
a social sense. Its not bad in the sense of youre a bad person
for lusting for money. Its bad for you.
Lusting for money is bad for us because it is a bottomless pit.
It will always occupy your mind. If you love money, and you
make it, theres never enough. There is never enough because
the desire is turned on and doesnt turn off at some number.
Its a fallacy to think it turns off at some number.
The punishment for the love of money is delivered at the same
time as the money. As you make money, you just want even
more, and you become paranoid and fearful of losing what you
do have. Theres no free lunch.
You make money to solve your money and material problems.
I think the best way to stay away from this constant love of
money is to not upgrade your lifestyle as you make money. Its
very easy to keep upgrading your lifestyle as you make money.
But if you can hold your lifestyle fixed and hopefully make your
money in giant lump sums as opposed to a trickle at a time,
you wont have time to upgrade your lifestyle. You may get so
far ahead you actually become financially free.
Another thing that helps: I value freedom above everything
else. All kinds of freedom: freedom to do what I want, freedom
from things I dont want to do, freedom from my own emotions
or things that may disturb my peace. For me, freedom is my
number one value.
To the extent money buys freedom, its great. But to the extent
it makes me less free, which it definitely does at some level as
well, I dont like it. 
The winners of any game are the people who are so addicted
they continue playing even as the marginal utility from
winning declines.
Do I have to start a company to be successful?
The most successful class of people in Silicon Valley on a con-
sistent basis are either the venture capitalists (because they
are diversified and control what used to be a scarce resource)
or people who are very good at identifying companies that have
just hit product/market fit. Those people have the background,
expertise, and references those companies really want to help

them scale. Then, they go into the latest Dropbox or the latest
Airbnb.
The people who were at Google, then joined Facebook when
it was one hundred people, and then joined Stripe when it
was one hundred people?
When Zuckerberg was just starting to scale his company and
panicked, he was like, I dont know how to do this. And he
called Jim Breyer [venture capitalist and founder of Accel
Partners]. And Jim Breyer said, Well, I have this really great
head of product at this other company, and you need this
person. Those people tend to do the best, risk-adjusted
over a long period of time, other than the venture investors
themselves. 
Some of the most successful people Ive seen in Silicon Valley
had breakouts very early in their careers. They got promoted
to VP, director, or CEO, or started a company that did well fairly
early. If youre not getting promoted through the ranks, it gets
a lot harder to catch up later in life. Its good to be in a smaller
company early because theres less of an infrastructure to pre-
vent early promotion. 
For someone who is early in their career (and maybe even later),
the single most important thing about a company is the alumni
network youre going to build. Think about who you will work
with and what those people are going on to do. 
HOW TO GET LUCKY
Why do you say, Get rich without getting lucky?
In 1,000 parallel universes, you want to be wealthy in 999 of
them. You dont want to be wealthy in the fifty of them where
you got lucky, so we want to factor luck out of it.
But getting lucky would help, right?
Just recently, Babak Nivi, my co-founder, and I were talking
on Twitter about how one gets lucky, and there are really four
kinds of luck we were talking about.
The first kind of luck is blind luck where one just gets lucky
because something completely out of their control happened.
This includes fortune, fate, etc.
Then, theres luck through persistence, hard work, hustle, and
motion. This is when youre running around creating opportu-
nities. Youre generating a lot of energy, youre doing a lot to stir
things up. Its almost like mixing a petri dish or mixing a bunch
of reagents and seeing what combines. Youre just generating
enough force, hustle, and energy for luck to find you.
A third way is you become very good at spotting luck. If you
are very skilled in a field, you will notice when a lucky break
happens in your field, and other people who arent attuned to
it wont notice. So, you become sensitive to luck.
The last kind of luck is the weirdest, hardest kind, where you
build a unique character, a unique brand, a unique mindset,
which causes luck to find you.
For example, lets say youre the best person in the world
at deep-sea diving. Youre known to take on deep-sea dives
nobody else will even dare to attempt. By sheer luck, somebody

finds a sunken treasure ship off the coast they cant get to.
Well, their luck just became your luck, because theyre going
to come to you to get to the treasure, and youre going to get
paid for it.
This is an extreme example, but it shows how one person had
blind luck finding the treasure. Them coming to you to extract
it and give you half is not blind luck. You created your own luck.
You put yourself in a position to capitalize on luck or to attract
luck when nobody else created the opportunity for themselves.
To get rich without getting lucky, we want to be deterministic.
We dont want to leave it to chance. 
Ways to get lucky:
 Hope luck finds you.
 Hustle until you stumble into it.
 Prepare the mind and be sensitive to chances others miss.
 Become the best at what you do. Refine what you do until
this is true. Opportunity will seek you out. Luck becomes
your destiny.
It starts becoming so deterministic, it stops being luck. The
definition starts fading from luck to destiny. To summarize
the fourth type: build your character in a certain way, then
your character becomes your destiny.
One of the things I think is important to make money is having
a reputation that makes people do deals through you. Remem-
ber the example of being a great diver where treasure hunters
will come and give you a piece of the treasure for your diving
skills.
Ifyouareatrusted,reliable,high-integrity,long-term-thinking
dealmaker, when other people want to do deals but dont know
how to do them in a trustworthy manner with strangers, they
will literally approach you and give you a cut of the deal just
because of the integrity and reputation youve built up.
Warren Buffett gets offered deals to buy companies, buy war-
rants, bail out banks, and do things other people cant do
because of his reputation. Of course, he has accountability
on the line, and he has a strong brand on the line.
Your character and your reputation are things you can build,
which will let you take advantage of opportunities other people
may characterize as lucky, but you know it wasnt luck. 
My co-founder Nivi said, In a long-term game, it seems that
everybody is making each other rich. And in a short-term game,
it seems like everybody is making themselves rich.
I think that is a brilliant formulation. In a long-term game, its
positive sum. Were all baking the pie together. Were trying
to make it as big as possible. And in a short-term game, were
cutting up the pie. 
How important is networking?
I think business networking is a complete waste of time. And
I know there are people and companies popularizing this con-
cept because it serves them and their business model well, but
the reality is if youre building something interesting, you will
always have more people who will want to know you. Trying to
build business relationships well in advance of doing business
is a complete waste of time. I have a much more comfortable
philosophy: Be a maker who makes something interesting

people want. Show your craft, practice your craft, and the right
people will eventually find you. 
And once youve met someone, how do you determine if you
can trust someone? What signals do you pay attention to?
If someone is talking a lot about how honest they are, theyre
probably dishonest. That is just a little telltale indicator Ive
learned. When someone spends too much time talking about
their own values or theyre talking themselves up, theyre cov-
ering for something. 
Sharks eat well but live a life surrounded by sharks.
I have great people in my life who are extremely successful,
very desirable (like everybody wants to be their friend), very
smart. Yet, Ive seen them do one or two things slightly not
great to other people. The first time, Ill say, Hey, I dont think
you should do this to that other person. Not because you wont
get away with it. You will get away with it, but because it will
hurt you in the end.
Not in some cosmic, karma kind of way, but I believe deep
down we all know who we are. You cannot hide anything from
yourself. Your own failures are written within your psyche, and
they are obvious to you. If you have too many of these moral
shortcomings, you will not respect yourself. The worst out-
come in this world is not having self-esteem. If you dont love
yourself, who will?
I think you just have to be very careful about doing things you
are fundamentally not going to be proud of, because they will
damage you. The first time someone acts this way, I will warn
them. By the way, nobody changes. Then I just distance myself
from them. I cut them out of my life. I just have this saying
inside my head: The closer you want to get to me, the better
your values have to be. 
GIVE ME A LEVER
LONG ENOUGH
AND A PLACE
TO STAND,
AND I WILL
MOVE THE
EARTH.
BE PATIENT
One thing I figured out later in life is generally (at least in
the tech business in Silicon Valley), great people have great
outcomes. You just have to be patient. Every person I met at
the beginning of my career twenty years ago, where I looked
at them and said, Wow, that guy or gal is super capableso
smart and dedicatedall of them, almost without exception,

became extremely successful. You just had to give them a long
enough timescale. It never happens in the timescale you want,
or they want, but it does happen. 
Apply specific knowledge with leverage and eventually, you
will get what you deserve.
It takes timeeven once you have all of these pieces in place,
there is an indeterminate amount of time you have to put in.
If youre counting, youll run out of patience before success
actually arrives.
Everybody wants to get rich immediately, but the world is an
efficient place; immediate doesnt work. You do have to put in
the time. You do have to put in the hours, and so I think you
have to put yourself in the position with the specific knowl-
edge, with accountability, with leverage, with the authentic
skill set you have, to be the best in the world at what you do.
You have to enjoy it and keep doing it, keep doing it, and keep
doing it. Dont keep track, and dont keep count because if you
do, you will run out of time. 
The most common bad advice I hear is: Youre too young.
Most of history was built by young people. They just got credit
when they were older. The only way to truly learn something
is by doing it. Yes, listen to guidance. But dont wait. 
People are oddly consistent. Karma is just you, repeating
your patterns, virtues, and flaws until you finally get what you
deserve.
Always pay it forward. And dont keep count.
This is not to say its easy. Its not easy. Its actually really
freaking hard. It is the hardest thing you will do. But its also
rewarding. Look at the kids who are born richthey have no
meaning to their lives.
Your real rsum is just a catalog of all your suffering. If I ask
you to describe your real life to yourself, and you look back
from your deathbed at the interesting things youve done, its
all going to be around the sacrifices you made, the hard things
you did.
However, anything youre given doesnt matter. You have
your four limbs, your brain, your head, your skinthats all
for granted. You have to do hard things anyway to create your
own meaning in life. Making money is a fine thing to choose.
Go struggle. It is hard. Im not going to say its easy. Its really
hard, but the tools are all available. Its all out there. 
Money buys you freedom in the material world. Its not going
to make you happy, its not going to solve your health problems,
its not going to make your family great, its not going to make
you fit, its not going to make you calm. But it will solve a lot
of external problems. Its a reasonable step to go ahead and
make money. 

What making money will do is solve your money problems. It
will remove a set of things that could get in the way of being
happy, but it is not going to make you happy. I know many
very wealthy people who are unhappy. Most of the time, the
person you have to become to make money is a high-anxiety,
high-stress, hard-working, competitive person. When you
have done that for twenty, thirty, forty, fifty years, and you
suddenly make money, you cant turn it off. Youve trained
yourself to be a high-anxiety person. Then, you have to learn
how to be happy. 
Lets get you rich first. Im very practical about it because, you
know, Buddha was a prince. He started off really rich, then he
got to go off in the woods.
In the old days, if you wanted to be peaceful inside, you would
become a monk. You would give up everything, renounce sex,
children, money, politics, science, technology, everything, and
you would go out in the woods by yourself. You had to give
everything up to be free inside.
Today, with this wonderful invention called money, you can
store it in a bank account. You can you work really hard, do
great things for society, and society will give you money for
things it wants but doesnt know how to get. You can save
money, you can live a little below your means, and you can
find a certain freedom.
That will give you the time and the energy to pursue your own
internal peace and happiness. I believe the solution to making
everybody happy is to give them what they want.
Lets get them all rich.
Lets get them all fit and healthy.
Then, lets get them all happy. 
Amazing how many people confuse wealth and wisdom.
BUILDING JUDGMENT
Theres no shortcut to smart.

JUDGMENT
If you want to make the maximum amount of money possi-
ble, if you want to get rich over your life in a deterministically
predictable way, stay on the bleeding edge of trends and
study technology, design, and artbecome really good at
something. 
You dont get rich by spending your time to save money.
You get rich by saving your time to make money.
Hard work is really overrated. How hard you work matters a
lot less in the modern economy.
What is underrated?
Judgment. Judgment is underrated. 
Can you define judgment?
My definition of wisdom is knowing the long-term conse-
quences of your actions. Wisdom applied to external problems
is judgment. Theyre highly linked; knowing the long-term
consequences of your actions and then making the right deci-
sion to capitalize on that. 
In an age of leverage, one correct decision can win
everything.
Without hard work, youll develop neither judgment nor
leverage.
You have to put in the time, but the judgment is more import-
ant. The direction youre heading in matters more than how
fast you move, especially with leverage. Picking the direction
youre heading in for every decision is far, far more important
than how much force you apply. Just pick the right direction
to start walking in, and start walking. 
HOW TO THINK CLEARLY
Clear thinker is a better compliment than smart.
Real knowledge is intrinsic, and its built from the ground up.
To use a math example, you cant understand trigonometry
without understanding arithmetic and geometry. Basically, if
someone is using a lot of fancy words and a lot of big concepts,
they probably dont know what theyre talking about. I think
the smartest people can explain things to a child. If you cant
explain it to a child, then you dont know it. Its a common
saying and its very true.
Richard Feynman very famously does this in Six Easy
Pieces, one of his early physics lectures. He basically explains
mathematics in three pages. He starts from the number line
countingand then he goes all the way up to precalculus. He
just builds it up through an unbroken chain of logic. He doesnt
rely on any definitions.

The really smart thinkers are clear thinkers. They understand
the basics at a very, very fundamental level. I would rather
understand the basics really well than memorize all kinds of
complicated concepts I cant stitch together and cant rederive
from the basics. If you cant rederive concepts from the basics
as you need them, youre lost. Youre just memorizing. 
The advanced concepts in a field are less proven. We use them
to signal insider knowledge, but wed be better off nailing the
basics. 
Clear thinkers appeal to their own authority.
Part of making effective decisions boils down to dealing with
reality. How do you make sure youre dealing with reality
when youre making decisions?
By not having a strong sense of self or judgments or mind
presence. The monkey mind will always respond with this
regurgitated emotional response to what it thinks the world
should be. Those desires will cloud your reality. This happens
a lot of times when people are mixing politics and business.
The number one thing clouding us from being able to see real-
ity is we have preconceived notions of the way it should be.
One definition of a moment of suffering is the moment when
youseethingsexactlythewaytheyare.Thiswholetime,youve
been convinced your business is doing great, and really, youve
ignored the signs its not doing well. Then, your business fails,
and you suffer because youve been putting off reality. Youve
been hiding it from yourself.
The good news is, the moment of sufferingwhen youre in
painis a moment of truth. It is a moment where youre forced
to embrace reality the way it actually is. Then, you can make
meaningful change and progress. You can only make progress
when youre starting with the truth.
The hard thing is seeing the truth. To see the truth, you have
to get your ego out of the way because your ego doesnt want
to face the truth. The smaller you can make your ego, the less
conditioned you can make your reactions, the less desires you
can have about the outcome you want, the easier it will be to
see the reality.
What we wish to be true clouds our perception of what is true.
Suffering is the moment when we can no longer deny reality.
Imagine were going through something difficult like a breakup,
a job loss, a business failure, or a health problem, and our
friends are advising us. When were advising them, the answer
is obvious. It comes to us in a minute, and we tell them exactly,
Oh that girl, get over her, she wasnt good for you anyway. Youll
be happier. Trust me. Youll find someone.
You know the correct answer, but your friend cant see it,
because theyre in the moment of suffering and pain. Theyre
still wishing reality was different. The problem isnt reality.
The problem is their desire is colliding with reality and pre-

venting them from seeing the truth, no matter how much you
say it. The same thing happens when I make decisions.
The more desire I have for something to work out a certain way,
the less likely I am to see the truth. Especially in business, if
something isnt going well, I try to acknowledge it publicly and
I try to acknowledge it publicly in front of my co-founders and
friends and co-workers. Then, Im not hiding it from anybody
else. If Im not hiding it from anybody, Im not going to delude
myself from whats actually going on. 
What you feel tells you nothing about the factsit merely tells
you something about your estimate of the facts.
Its actually really important to have empty space. If you dont
have a day or two every week in your calendar where youre
not always in meetings, and youre not always busy, then youre
not going to be able to think.
Youre not going to be able to have good ideas for your busi-
ness. Youre not going to be able to make good judgments. I
also encourage taking at least one day a week (preferably two,
because if you budget two, youll end up with one) where you
just have time to think.
Its only after youre bored you have the great ideas. Its never
going to be when youre stressed, or busy, running around or
rushed. Make the time. 
Very smart people tend to be weird since they insist on
thinking everything through for themselves.

A contrarian isnt one who always objectsthats a
conformist of a different sort. A contrarian reasons
independently from the ground up and resists pressure to
conform.
Cynicism is easy. Mimicry is easy.
Optimistic contrarians are the rarest breed.
CONTRARIANS
OPTIMISTS
SHED YOUR IDENTITY TO SEE REALITY
Our egos are constructed in our formative yearsour first
two decades. They get constructed by our environment, our
parents, society. Then, we spend the rest of our life trying to
make our ego happy. We interpret anything new through our
ego: How do I change the external world to make it more how
I would like it to be? 
Tension is who you think you should be.
Relaxation is who you are.
Buddhist saying
You absolutely need habits to function. You cannot solve every
problem in life as if it is the first time its thrown at you. We
accumulate all these habits. We put them in the bundle of
identity, ego, ourselves, and then we get attached to them. Im
Naval. This is the way I am.
Its really important to be able to uncondition yourself, to be
able to take your habits apart and say, Okay, this is a habit I
probably picked up when I was a toddler trying to get my par-
ents attention. Now Ive reinforced it and reinforced it, and
I call it a part of my identity. Does it still serve me? Does it
make me happier? Does it make me healthier? Does it make
me accomplish whatever I set out to accomplish?
Im less habitual than most people. I dont like to structure
my day. To the extent I have habits, I try to make them more
deliberate rather than accidents of history. 

Any belief you took in a package (ex. Democrat, Catholic,
American) is suspect and should be re-evaluated from base
principles.
I try not to have too much Ive pre-decided. I think creating
identities and labels locks you in and keeps you from seeing
the truth.
To be honest, speak without identity.
I used to identify as libertarian, but then I would find myself
defending positions I hadnt really thought through because
theyre a part of the libertarian canon. If all your beliefs line
up into neat little bundles, you should be highly suspicious.
I dont like to self-identify on almost any level anymore, which
keeps me from having too many of these so-called stable
beliefs. 
We each have a contrarian belief society rejects. But the
more our own identity and local tribe reject it, the more real
it likely is.
There are two attractive lessons about suffering in the long
term. It can make you accept the world the way it is. The other
lesson is it can make your ego change in an extremely hard way.
Maybe youre a competitive athlete, and you get injured badly,
like Bruce Lee. You have to accept being an athlete is not your
entire identity, and maybe you can forge a new identity as a
philosopher. 
Facebook redesigns. Twitter redesigns. Personalities, careers,
and teams also need redesigns. There are no permanent
solutions in a dynamic system.
TENSION IS WHO YOU THINK YOU SHOULD BE.
RELAXATION IS WHO YOU ARE.
LEARN THE SKILLS OF DECISION-MAKING
The classical virtues are all decision-making heuristics to
make one optimize for the long term rather than for the short
term. 

Self-serving conclusions should have a higher bar.
I do view a lot of my goals over the next few years of uncondi-
tioning previous learned responses or habituated responses,
so I can make decisions more cleanly in the moment with-
out relying on memory or prepackaged heuristics and
judgments. 
Almost all biases are time-saving heuristics. For important
decisions, discard memory and identity, and focus on the
problem.
Radical honesty just means I want to be free. Part of being
free means I can say what I think and think what I say. Theyre
highlycongruentandintegrated.TheoreticalphysicistRichard
Feynman famously said, You should never, ever fool anybody,
and you are the easiest person to fool. The moment you tell
somebody something dishonest, youve lied to yourself. Then
youll start believing your own lie, which will disconnect you
from reality and take you down the wrong road.
I never ask if I like it or I dont like it. I think this is what it
is or this is what it isnt.
Richard Feynman
Its really important for me to be honest. I dont go out of my
way volunteering negative or nasty things. I would combine
radical honesty with an old rule Warren Buffett has, which is
praise specifically, criticize generally. I try to follow this. I dont
always follow it, but I think I follow it enough to have made a
difference in my life.
If you have a criticism of someone, then dont criticize the
personcriticize the general approach or criticize the class
of activities. If you have to praise somebody, then always try
and find the person who is the best example of what youre
praising and praise the person, specifically. Then peoples egos
and identities, which we all have, dont work against you. They
work for you. 
Any advice on developing capacity for instinctual blunt
honesty?
Tell everyone. Start now. It doesnt have to be blunt. Charisma
is the ability to project confidence and love at the same time.
Its almost always possible to be honest and positive. 
As an investor and CEO of AngelList, youre paid to be right
when other people are wrong. Do you have a process around
how you make decisions?
Yes. Decision-making is everything. In fact, someone who
makes decisions right 80 percent of the time instead of 70
percent of the time will be valued and compensated in the
market hundreds of times more.
I think people have a hard time understanding a fundamental
fact of leverage. If I manage $1 billion and Im right 10 percent
more often than somebody else, my decision-making creates
$100 million worth of value on a judgment call. With modern

technology and large workforces and capital, our decisions
are leveraged more and more.
If you can be more right and more rational, youre going to
get nonlinear returns in your life. I love the blog Farnam
Street because it really focuses on helping you be more accu-
rate, an overall better decision-maker. Decision-making is
everything. 
The more you know, the less you diversify.
COLLECT MENTAL MODELS
During decision-making, the brain is a memory prediction
machine.
A lousy way to do memory prediction is X happened in the
past, therefore X will happen in the future. Its too based on
specific circumstances. What you want is principles. You want
mental models.
The best mental models I have found came through evolution,
game theory, and Charlie Munger. Charlie Munger is Warren
Buffetts partner. Very good investor. He has tons and tons of
great mental models. Author and trader Nassim Taleb has
great mental models. Benjamin Franklin had great mental
models. I basically load my head full of mental models. 
I use my tweets and other peoples tweets as maxims that help
compress my own learnings and recall them. The brain space
is finiteyou have finite neuronsso you can almost think
of these as pointers, addresses, or mnemonics to help you
remember deep-seated principles where you have the under-
lying experience to back it up.
If you dont have the underlying experience, then it just reads
like a collection of quotes. Its cool, its inspirational for a
moment, maybe youll make a nice poster out of it. But then
you forget it and move on. Mental models are really just com-
pact ways for you to recall your own knowledge. 
EVOLUTION
I think a lot of modern society can be explained through evo-
lution. One theory is civilization exists to answer the question
of who gets to mate. If you look around, from a purely sexual
selection perspective, sperm is abundant and eggs are scarce.
Its an allocation problem.
Literally all of the works of mankind and womankind can be
traced down to people trying to solve this problem.
Evolution, thermodynamics, information theory, and com-
plexity have explanatory and predictive power in many aspects
of life. 
INVERSION
I dont believe I have the ability to say what is going to work.
Rather, I try to eliminate whats not going to work. I think
being successful is just about not making mistakes. Its not
about having correct judgment. Its about avoiding incorrect
judgments. 

COMPLEXITY THEORY
I was really into complexity theory back in the mid-90s. The
more I got into it, the more I understand the limits of our
knowledge and the limits of our prediction capability. Com-
plexity has been super helpful to me. It has helped me come
to a system that operates in the face of ignorance. I believe we
are fundamentally ignorant and very, very bad at predicting
the future. 
ECONOMICS
Microeconomics and game theory are fundamental. I dont
think you can be successful in business or even navigate most
of our modern capitalist society without an extremely good
understanding of supply-and-demand, labor-versus-capital,
game theory, and those kinds of things. 
Ignore the noise. The market will decide.
PRINCIPAL-AGENT PROBLEM
To me, the principal-agent problem is the single most funda-
mental problem in microeconomics. If you do not understand
the principal-agent problem, you will not know how to navi-
gate your way through the world. It is important if you want to
build a successful company or be successful in your dealings.
Its a very simple concept. Julius Caesar famously said, If you
want it done, then go. And if not, then send. What he meant
was, if you want it done right, then you have to go yourself and
do it. When you are the principal, then you are the owneryou
care, and you will do a great job. When you are the agent and
you are doing it on somebody elses behalf, you can do a bad
job. You just dont care. You optimize for yourself rather than
for the principals assets.
The smaller the company, the more everyone feels like a prin-
cipal. The less you feel like an agent, the better the job youre
going to do. The more closely you can tie someones compensa-
tion to the exact value theyre creating, the more you turn them
into a principal, and the less you turn them into an agent. 
I think at a core fundamental level, we understand this. Were
attracted to principals, and we all bond with principals, but the
media and modern society spend a lot of time brainwashing
you about needing an agent, an agent being important, and the
agent being knowledgeable. 
COMPOUND INTEREST
Compound interestmost of you should know it in the finance
context. If you dont, crack open a microeconomics textbook.
Its worth reading a microeconomics textbook from start to
finish.
An example of compound interestlets say youre earning 10
percent a year on your $1. The first year, you make 10 percent,
and you end up with $1.10. The next year, you end up with $1.21,
and the next year $1.33. It keeps adding onto itself. If youre
compounding at 30 percent per year for thirty years, you dont
just end up with ten or twenty times your moneyyou end up
with thousands of times your money. 
In the intellectual domain, compound interest rules. When

you look at a business with one hundred users growing at
a compound rate of 20 percent per month, it can very, very
quickly stack up to having millions of users. Sometimes, even
the founders of these companies are surprised by how large
the business scales. 
BASIC MATH
I think basic mathematics is really underrated. If youre going
to make money, if youre going to invest money, your basic
math should be really good. You dont need to learn geometry,
trigonometry, calculus, or any of the complicated stuff if youre
just going into business. But you want arithmetic, probability,
and statistics. Those are extremely important. Crack open a
basic math book, and make sure you are really good at mul-
tiplying, dividing, compounding, probability, and statistics.
BLACK SWANS
Theres a new branch of probability statistics, which is really
around tail events. Black swans are extreme probabilities.
Again, I have to refer back to Nassim Taleb, who I think is one
of the greatest philosopher-scientists of our times. Hes really
done a lot of pioneering work on this.
CALCULUS
Calculus is useful to know, to understand the rates of change
and how nature works. But its more important to understand
theprinciplesofcalculuswhereyouremeasuringthechange
in small discrete or small continuous events. Its not import-
ant you solve integrals or do derivations on demand, because
youre not going to need to in the business world.
FALSIFIABILITY
Least understood, but the most important principle for
anyone claiming science on their sidefalsifiability. If it
doesnt make falsifiable predictions, its not science. For you
to believe something is true, it should have predictive power,
and it must be falsifiable. 
I think macroeconomics, because it doesnt make falsifiable
predictions (which is the hallmark of science), has become
corrupted. You never have a counterexample when studying
the economy. You can never take the US economy and run two
different experiments at the same time. 
IF YOU CANT DECIDE, THE ANSWER IS NO.
If Im faced with a difficult choice, such as:
 Should I marry this person?
 Should I take this job?
 Should I buy this house?
 Should I move to this city?
 Should I go into business with this person?
Ifyoucannotdecide,theanswerisno.Andthereasonis,modern
societyisfullofoptions.Therearetonsandtonsofoptions.We
liveonaplanetofsevenbillionpeople,andweareconnectedto
everybodyontheinternet.Therearehundredsofthousandsof
careers available to you. There are so many choices.
Youre biologically not built to realize how many choices there
are. Historically, weve all evolved in tribes of 150 people. When
someone comes along, they may be your only option for a
partner.

When you choose something, you get locked in for a long time.
Starting a business may take ten years. You start a relationship
that will be five years or maybe more. You move to a city for
ten to twenty years. These are very, very long-lived decisions.
Its very, very important we only say yes when we are pretty
certain. Youre never going to be absolutely certain, but youre
going to be very certain.
If you find yourself creating a spreadsheet for a decision with
a list of yess and nos, pros and cons, checks and balances, why
this is good or badforget it. If you cannot decide, the answer
is no. 
RUN UPHILL
Simple heuristic: If youre evenly split on a difficult decision,
take the path more painful in the short term.
If you have two choices to make, and theyre relatively equal
choices, take the path more difficult and more painful in the
short term.
Whats actually going on is one of these paths requires short-
term pain. And the other path leads to pain further out in
the future. And what your brain is doing through conflict-
avoidance is trying to push off the short-term pain.
By definition, if the two are even and one has short-term pain,
that path has long-term gain associated. With the law of com-
pound interest, long-term gain is what you want to go toward.
Your brain is overvaluing the side with the short-term happi-
ness and trying to avoid the one with short-term pain.
So you have to cancel the tendency out (its a powerful subcon-
scious tendency) by leaning into the pain. As you know, most
of the gains in life come from suffering in the short term so
you can get paid in the long term.
Working out for me is not fun; I suffer in the short term, I feel
pain. But then in the long term, Im better off because I have
muscles or Im healthier.
If I am reading a book and Im getting confused, it is just like
working out and the muscle getting sore or tired, except now
my brain is being overwhelmed. In the long run Im getting
smarter because Im absorbing new concepts from working
at the limit or edge of my capability.
So you generally want to lean into things with short-term pain,
but long-term gain.
Whatarethemostefficientwaystobuildnewmentalmodels?
Read a lotjust read. 
Reading science, math, and philosophy one hour per day will
likely put you at the upper echelon of human success within
seven years.

LEARN TO LOVE TO READ
(Specific recommendations for books, blogs, and more are in
Navals Recommended Reading section.)
The genuine love for reading itself, when cultivated, is a super-
power. We live in the age of Alexandria, when every book and
every piece of knowledge ever written down is a fingertip away.
The means of learning are abundantits the desire to learn
that is scarce. 
Reading was my first love. 
I remember my grandparents house in India. Id be a little
kid on the floor going through all of my grandfathers Read-
ers Digests, which is all he had to read. Now, of course, theres
a smorgasbord of information out thereanybody can read
anything all the time. Back then, it was much more limited.
I would read comic books, storybooks, whatever I could get
my hands on.
I think I always loved to read because Im actually an antiso-
cial introvert. I was lost in the world of words and ideas from
an early age. I think some of it comes from the happy cir-
cumstance that when I was young, nobody forced me to read
certain things.
I think theres a tendency among parents and teachers to
say, Oh, you should read this, but dont read that. I read a
lot which (by todays standards) would be considered mental
junk food. 
Read what you love until you love to read.
You almost have to read the stuff youre reading, because youre
into it. You dont need any other reason. Theres no mission
here to accomplish. Just read because you enjoy it.
These days, I find myself rereading as much (or more) as I do
reading. A tweet from @illacertus said, I dont want to read
everything. I just want to read the 100 great books over and
over again. I think theres a lot to that idea. Its really more
about identifying the great books for you because different
books speak to different people. Then, you can really absorb
those.
Reading a book isnt a racethe better the book, the more
slowly it should be absorbed.
I dont know about you, but I have very poor attention. I skim.
I speed read. I jump around. I could not tell you specific pas-
sages or quotes from books. At some deep level, you absorb
them, and they become threads in the tapestry of your psyche.
They kind of weave in there.
Im sure youve had this feeling where you pick up a book and
start reading it, and youre like, This is pretty interesting. This
is pretty good. Youre getting this increasing sense of deja vu.
Then halfway through the book, you realize, Ive read this
book before. Thats perfectly fine. It means you were ready
to reread it. 

I dont actually read a lot of books. I pick up a lot of books
and only get through a few which form the foundation of my
knowledge.
The reality is, I dont actually read much compared to what
people think. I probably read one to two hours a day. That puts
me in the top .00001 percent. I think that alone accounts for
any material success Ive had in my life and any intelligence I
might have. Real people dont read an hour a day. Real people,
I think, read a minute a day or less. Making it an actual habit
is the most important thing.
It almost doesnt matter what you read. Eventually, you will
read enough things (and your interests will lead you there)
that it will dramatically improve your life. Just like the best
workout for you is one youre excited enough to do every day,
I would say for books, blogs, tweets, or whateveranything
with ideas and information and learningthe best ones to
read are the ones youre excited about reading all the time. 
As long as I have a book in my hand, I dont feel like Im
wasting time.
Charlie Munger
Everyones brain works differently. Some people love to take
notes. Actually, my notetaking is Twitter. I read and read and
read. If I have some fundamental ah-ha insight or concept,
Twitter forces me to distill it into a few characters. Then I try
and put it out there as an aphorism. Then I get attacked by
random people who point out all kinds of obvious exceptions
and jump down my throat. Then I think, Why did I do this
again? 
Pointing out obvious exceptions implies either the target isnt
smart or you arent.
When you first pick up a book, are you skimming for some-
thing interesting? How do you go about reading it? Do you
just flip to a random page and start reading? Whats your
process?
Ill start at the beginning, but Ill move fast. If its not interest-
ing, Ill just start flipping ahead, skimming, or speed reading. If
it doesnt grab my attention within the first chapter in a mean-
ingful, positive way, Ill either drop the book or skip ahead a
few chapters.
I dont believe in delayed gratification when there are an
infinite number of books out there to read. There are so many
great books.
The number of books completed is a vanity metric. As you
know more, you leave more books unfinished. Focus on new
concepts with predictive power.
Generally, Ill skim. Ill fast forward. Ill try and find a part to
catch my attention. Most books have one point to make. (Obvi-
ously, this is nonfiction. Im not talking about fiction.) They

have one point to make, they make it, and then they give you
example after example after example after example, and they
apply it to explain everything in the world. Once I feel like
Ive gotten the gist, I feel very comfortable putting the book
down. Theres a lot of these, what I would call pseudoscience
bestsellersPeople are like, Oh, did you read this book? I
always say yes, but the reality is I read maybe two chapters of
it. I got the gist.
If they wrote it to make money, dont read it.
What practices do you follow to internalize/organize infor-
mation from reading books?
Explain what you learned to someone else. Teaching forces
learning.
Its not about educated vs. uneducated. Its about likes
to read and doesnt like to read.
What can I do for the next sixty days to become a clearer,
more independent thinker?
Read the greats in math, science, and philosophy. Ignore your
contemporaries and news. Avoid tribal identification. Put
truth above social approval. 
Study logic and math, because once youve mastered them,
you wont fear any book.
No book in the library should scare you. Whether its a math,
physics, electrical engineering, sociology, or economics book.
You should be able to take any book down off the shelf and read
it. A number of them are going to be too difficult for you. Thats
okayread them anyway. Then go back and reread them and
reread them.
When youre reading a book and youre confused, that con-
fusion is similar to the pain you get in the gym when youre
working out. But youre building mental muscles instead of
physical muscles. Learn how to learn and read the books.
The problem with saying just read is there is so much junk
out there. There are as many different kinds of authors as there
are people. Many of them are going to write lots of junk.
I have people in my life I consider to be very well-read who
arent very smart. The reason is because even though theyre
very well-read, they read the wrong things in the wrong order.
They started out reading a set of false or just weakly true things,
and those formed the axioms of the foundation for their worl-
dview. Then, when new things come, they judge the new idea
based on a foundation they already built. Your foundation is
critical.
Because most people are intimidated by math and cant
independently critique it, they overvalue opinions backed
with math/pseudoscience.

When it comes to reading, make sure your foundation is very,
very high quality.
The best way to have a high-quality foundation (you may not
love this answer), but the trick is to stick to science and to
stick to the basics. Generally, there are only a few things you
can read people dont disagree with. Very few people disagree
2+2=4, right? That is serious knowledge. Mathematics is a solid
foundation.
Similarly, the hard sciences are a solid foundation. Microeco-
nomics is a solid foundation. The moment you start wandering
outside of these solid foundations youre in trouble because
now you dont know whats true and whats false. I would focus
as much as I could on having solid foundations.
Its better to be really great at arithmetic and geometry than to
be deep into advanced mathematics. I would read microeco-
nomics all day longMicroeconomics 101.
Another way to do this is to read originals and read classics.
If youre interested in evolution, read Charles Darwin. Dont
begin with Richard Dawkins (even though I think hes great).
Read him later; read Darwin first.
If you want to learn macroeconomics, first read Adam Smith,
read von Mises, or read Hayek. Start with the original philos-
ophers of the economy. If youre into communist or socialist
ideas (which Im personally not), start by reading Karl Marx.
Dont read the current interpretation someone is feeding you
about how things should be done and run.
If you start with the originals as your foundations, then you
have enough of a worldview and understanding that you wont
fear any book. Then you can just learn. If youre a perpetual
learning machine, you will never be out of options for how to
make money. You can always see whats coming up in society,
what the value is, where the demand is, and you can learn to
come up to speed. 
To think clearly, understand the basics. If youre memorizing
advanced concepts without being able to re-derive them as
needed, youre lost.
WerenowinadayandageofTwitterandFacebook.Weregetting
bite-sized,pithywisdom,whichisreallyhardtoabsorb.Books
areverydifficulttoreadasamodernpersonbecausewevebeen
trained. We have two contradictory pieces of training:
One is our attention span has gone through the floor because
were hit with so much information all the time. We want to
skip, summarize, and cut to the chase.
Twitter has made me a worse reader but a much better writer.
On the other hand, were also taught from a young age to finish
your books. Books are sacredwhen you go to school and
youre assigned to read a book, you have to finish the book.
Over time, we forget how to read books. Everyone I know is
stuck on some book.
Im sure youre stuck on something right nowits page 332,

you cant go any further, but you know you should finish the
book. So what do you do? You give up reading books for a while.
For me, giving up reading was a tragedy. I grew up on books,
then I switched to blogs, then I switched to Twitter and Face-
book, and I realized I wasnt actually learning anything. I was
just taking little dopamine snacks all day long. I was getting
my little 140-character burst of dopamine. I would Tweet, then
look to see who retweeted my Tweet. Its a fun and wonderful
thing, but its a game I was playing.
I realized I had to go back to reading books. 
I knew it was a very hard problem because my brain had now
been trained to spend time on Facebook, Twitter, and these
other bite-sized pieces.
I came up with this hack where I started treating books as
throwaway blog posts or bite-sized tweets or posts. I felt no
obligation to finish any book. Now, when someone mentions a
book to me, I buy it. At any given time, Im reading somewhere
between ten and twenty books. Im flipping through them.
If the book is getting a little boring, Ill skip ahead. Sometimes,
I start reading a book in the middle because some paragraph
caught my eye. Ill just continue from there, and I feel no obli-
gation whatsoever to finish the book. All of a sudden, books
are back into my reading library. Thats great, because there
is ancient wisdom in books. 
When solving problems: the older the problem, the older the
solution.
If youre trying to learn how to drive a car or fly a plane, you
should read something written in the modern age because
this problem was created in the modern age and the solution
is great in the modern age.
If youre talking about an old problem like how to keep your
body healthy, how to stay calm and peaceful, what kinds of
value systems are good, how you raise a family, and those kinds
of things, the older solutions are probably better.
Any book that survived for two thousand years has been fil-
tered through many people. The general principles are more
likely to be correct. I wanted to get back into reading these
sorts of books. 
You know that song you cant get out of your head? All
thoughts work that way. Careful what you read.

A calm mind, a fit body, and a house full of love.
These things cannot be bought.
They must be earned.
PART II
HAPPINESS
The three big ones in life are wealth, health, and happiness.
We pursue them in that order, but their importance is reverse.
LEARNING HAPPINESS
Dont take yourself so seriously. Youre just a monkey with a
plan.

HAPPINESS IS LEARNED
Ten years ago, if you would have asked me how happy I was, I
would have dismissed the question. I didnt want to talk about
it.
On a scale of 110, I would have said 2/10 or 3/10. Maybe 4/10
on my best days. But I did not value being happy.
Today, I am a 9/10. And yes, having money helps, but its actu-
ally a very small piece of it. Most of it comes from learning over
the years my own happiness is the most important thing to me,
and Ive cultivated it with a lot of techniques. 
Maybe happiness is not something you inherit or even
choose, but a highly personal skill that can be learned, like
fitness or nutrition.
Happiness is a very evolving thing, I think, like all the great
questions. When youre a little kid, you go to your mom and
ask, What happens when we die? Is there a Santa Claus? Is
there a God? Should I be happy? Who should I marry? Those
kinds of things. There are no glib answers because no answers
apply to everybody. These kinds of questions ultimately do
have answers, but they have personal answers.
The answer that works for me is going to be nonsense to you,
and vice versa. Whatever happiness means to me, it means
something different to you. I think its very important to
explore what these definitions are.
For some people I know, its a flow state. For some people, its
satisfaction. For some people, its a feeling of contentment. My
definition keeps evolving. The answer I would have given you
a year ago will be different than what I tell you now.
Today, I believe happiness is really a default state. Happiness
is there when you remove the sense of something missing in
your life.
We are highly judgmental survival-and-replication machines.
We constantly walk around thinking, I need this, or I need
that, trapped in the web of desires. Happiness is the state
when nothing is missing. When nothing is missing, your mind
shuts down and stops running into the past or future to regret
something or to plan something.
In that absence, for a moment, you have internal silence. When
you have internal silence, then you are content, and you are
happy. Feel free to disagree. Again, its different for everybody.
People mistakenly believe happiness is just about positive
thoughts and positive actions. The more Ive read, the more
Ive learned, and the more Ive experienced (because I verify
this for myself), every positive thought essentially holds within
it a negative thought. It is a contrast to something negative.
The Tao Te Ching says this more articulately than I ever could,
but its all duality and polarity. If I say Im happy, that means I
was sad at some point. If I say hes attractive, then somebody
else is unattractive. Every positive thought even has a seed of
a negative thought within it and vice versa, which is why a lot
of greatness in life comes out of suffering. You have to view the
negative before you can aspire to and appreciate the positive.
To me, happiness is not about positive thoughts. Its not about

negative thoughts. Its about the absence of desire, especially
the absence of desire for external things. The fewer desires
I can have, the more I can accept the current state of things,
the less my mind is moving, because the mind really exists in
motion toward the future or the past. The more present I am,
the happier and more content I will be. If I latch onto a feeling,
if I say, Oh, Im happy now, and I want to stay happy, then Im
going to drop out of that happiness. Now, suddenly, the mind is
moving. Its trying to attach to something. Its trying to create
a permanent situation out of a temporary situation.
Happinesstomeismainlynotsuffering,notdesiring,notthink-
ingtoomuchaboutthefutureorthepast,reallyembracingthe
present moment and the reality of what is, and the way it is. 
If you ever want to have peace in your life, you have to move
beyond good and evil.
Nature has no concept of happiness or unhappiness. Nature
follows unbroken mathematical laws and a chain of cause and
effect from the Big Bang to now. Everything is perfect exactly
the way it is. It is only in our particular minds we are unhappy
or not happy, and things are perfect or imperfect because of
what we desire. 
The world just reflects your own feelings back at you. Real-
ity is neutral. Reality has no judgments. To a tree, there is no
concept of right or wrong, good or bad. Youre born, you have
a whole set of sensory experiences and stimulations (lights,
colors, and sounds), and then you die. How you choose to inter-
pret them is up to youyou have that choice.
This is what I mean when I say happiness is a choice. If you
believe its a choice, you can start working on it. 
There are no external forces affecting your emotionsas
much as it may feel that way.
Ive also come to believe in the complete and utter insignifi-
cance of the self, and I think that helps a lot. For example, if
you thought you were the most important thing in the Universe,
then you would have to bend the entire Universe to your will.
If youre the most important thing in the Universe, then how
could it not conform to your desires. If it doesnt conform to
your desires, something is wrong.
However, if you view yourself as a bacteria or an amoebaor
if you view all of your works as writing on water or building
castles in the sand, then you have no expectation for how life
should actually be. Life is just the way it is. When you accept
that, you have no cause to be happy or unhappy. Those things
almost dont apply.
Happiness is whats there when you remove the sense that
something is missing in your life.
What youre left with in that neutral state is not neutrality. I
think people believe neutrality would be a very bland existence.
No, this is the existence little children live. If you look at little
children, on balance, theyre generally pretty happy because
they are really immersed in the environment and the moment,

without any thought of how it should be given their personal
preferences and desires. I think the neutral state is actually a
perfection state. One can be very happy as long as one isnt too
caught up in their own head. 
Our lives are a blink of a firefly in the night. Youre just barely
here. You have to make the most of every minute, which doesnt
mean you chase some stupid desire for your entire life. What
it means is every second you have on this planet is very pre-
cious, and its your responsibility to make sure youre happy
and interpreting everything in the best possible way. 
We think of ourselves as fixed and the world as malleable,
but its really we who are malleable and the world is largely
fixed.
Can practicing meditation help you accept reality?
Yeah. But its amazing how little it helps. [laughs] You can be a
long-time meditator, but if someone says the wrong thing in
the wrong way, you go back to your ego-driven self. Its almost
like youre lifting one-pound weights, but then somebody
drops a huge barbell with a stack of plates on your head.
Its absolutely better than doing nothing. But when the actual
moment of mental or emotional suffering arrives, its still
never easy.  Real happiness only comes as a side-effect of
peace. Most of it is going to come from acceptance, not from
changing your external environment. 
A rational person can find peace by cultivating indifference
to things outside of their control.
I have lowered my identity.
I have lowered the chattering of my mind.
I dont care about things that dont really matter.
I dont get involved in politics.
I dont hang around unhappy people.
I really value my time on this earth.
I read philosophy.
I meditate.
I hang around with happy people.
And it works.
Youcanveryslowlybutsteadilyandmethodicallyimproveyour
happiness baseline, just like you can improve your fitness. 
HAPPINESS IS A CHOICE
Happiness, love, and passionarent things you findtheyre
choices you make.

Happiness is a choice you make and a skill you develop.
The mind is just as malleable as the body. We spend so much
time and effort trying to change the external world, other
people, and our own bodiesall while accepting ourselves
the way we were programmed in our youths.
We accept the voice in our head as the source of all truth. But
all of it is malleable, and every day is new. Memory and identity
are burdens from the past preventing us from living freely in
the present. 
HAPPINESS REQUIRES PRESENCE
At any given time, when youre walking down the streets, a very
small percentage of your brain is focused on the present. The
rest is planning the future or regretting the past. This keeps
you from having an incredible experience. Its keeping you
from seeing the beauty in everything and for being grateful
for where you are. You can literally destroy your happiness if
you spend all of your time living in delusions of the future. 
We crave experiences that will make us be present, but the
cravings themselves take us from the present moment.
I just dont believe in anything from my past. Anything. No
memories. No regrets. No people. No trips. Nothing. A lot of
our unhappiness comes from comparing things from the past
to the present. 
Anticipation for our vices pulls us into the future. Eliminating
vices makes it easier to be present.
Theres a great definition I read: Enlightenment is the space
between your thoughts. It means enlightenment isnt some-
thing you achieve after thirty years sitting on a mountaintop.
Its something you can achieve moment to moment, and you
can be enlightened to a certain percent every single day. 
What if this life is the paradise we were promised, and were
just squandering it?
HAPPINESS REQUIRES PEACE
Are happiness and purpose interconnected?
Happiness is such an overloaded word, Im not even sure what
it means. For me these days, happiness is more about peace
than it is about joy. I dont think peace and purpose go together.
If its your internal purpose, the thing you most want to do,
then sure, youll be happy doing it. But an externally inflicted
purpose, like society wants me to do X, I am the first son of
the first son of this, so I should do Y, or I have this debt or
burden I took on, I dont think it will make you happy.
I think a lot of us have this low-level pervasive feeling of anx-
iety. If you pay attention to your mind, sometimes youre just
running around doing your thing and youre not feeling great,
and you notice your mind is chattering and chattering about

something. Maybe you cant sit stillTheres this nexting
thing where youre sitting in one spot thinking about where
you should be next.
Its always the next thing, then the next thing, the next thing
after that, then the next thing after that creating this pervasive
anxiety.
Its most obvious if you ever just sit down and try and do noth-
ing, nothing. I mean nothing, I mean not read a book, I mean
not listen to music, I mean literally just sit down and do noth-
ing. You cant do it, because theres anxiety always trying to
make you get up and go, get up and go, get up and go. I think its
important just being aware the anxiety is making you unhappy.
The anxiety is just a series of running thoughts.
How I combat anxiety: I dont try and fight it, I just notice
Im anxious because of all these thoughts. I try to figure out,
Would I rather be having this thought right now, or would I
rather have my peace? Because as long as I have my thoughts,
I cant have my peace.
Youll notice when I say happiness, I mean peace. When a lot
of people say happiness, they mean joy or bliss, but Ill take
peace. 
A happy person isnt someone whos happy all the time.
Its someone who effortlessly interprets events in such a way
that they dont lose their innate peace.
TO BE UNHAPPY
UNTIL YOU GET
DESIRE
WHAT
YOU
WANT.
IS A CONTRACT
THAT YOU MAKE
WITH YOURSELF
EVERY DESIRE IS A CHOSEN UNHAPPINESS
I think the most common mistake for humanity is believ-
ing youre going to be made happy because of some external
circumstance. I know thats not original. Thats not new. Its
fundamental Buddhist wisdomIm not taking credit for it. I
think I really just recognize it on a fundamental level, includ-
ing in myself.
We bought a new car. Now, Im waiting for the new car to arrive.
Of course, every night, Im on the forums reading about the car.
Why? Its a silly object. Its a silly car. Its not going to change
my life much or at all. I know the instant the car arrives I wont
care about it anymore. The thing is, Im addicted to the desir-
ing. Im addicted to the idea of this external thing bringing
me some kind of happiness and joy, and this is completely
delusional.

Looking outside yourself for anything is the fundamental delu-
sion. Not to say you shouldnt do things on the outside. You
absolutely should. Youre a living creature. There are things
you do. You locally reverse entropy. Thats why youre here.
Youre meant to do something. Youre not just meant to lie there
in the sand and meditate all day long. You should self-actualize.
You should do what you are meant to do.
The idea youre going to change something in the outside world,
and that is going to bring you the peace, everlasting joy, and
happiness you deserve, is a fundamental delusion we all suffer
from, including me. The mistake over and over and over is to
say, Oh, Ill be happy when I get that thing, whatever it is. That
is the fundamental mistake we all make, 24/7, all day long. 
The fundamental delusion: There is something out there that
will make me happy and fulfilled forever.
Desire is a contract you make with yourself to be unhappy
until you get what you want. I dont think most of us realize
thats what it is. I think we go about desiring things all day long
and then wonder why were unhappy. I like to stay aware of it,
because then I can choose my desires very carefully. I try not
to have more than one big desire in my life at any given time,
and I also recognize it as the axis of my suffering. I realize the
area where Ive chosen to be unhappy. 
Desire is a contract you make with yourself to be unhappy
until you get what you want.
One thing Ive learned recently: its way more important to per-
fect your desires than to try to do something you dont 100
percent desire. 
When youre young and healthy, you can do more. By doing
more, youre actually taking on more and more desires. You
dont realize this is slowly destroying your happiness. I find
younger people are less happy but more healthy. Older people
are more happy but less healthy.
When youre young, you have time. You have health, but you
have no money. When youre middle-aged, you have money
and you have health, but you have no time. When youre old,
you have money and you have time, but you have no health. So
the trifecta is trying to get all three at once.
By the time people realize they have enough money, theyve
lost their time and their health. 
SUCCESS DOES NOT EARN HAPPINESS
Happiness is being satisfied with what you have.
Success comes from dissatisfaction. Choose.
Confucius says you have two lives, and the second one begins
when you realize you only have one. When and how did your
second life begin?
Thats a very deep question. Most people who are past a cer-
tain age have had this feeling or phenomenon; theyve gone

through life a certain way and then gotten to a certain stage
and had to make some pretty big changes. Im definitely also
in that boat.
I struggled for a lot of my life to have certain material and
social successes. When I achieved those material and social
successes (or at least was beyond a point where they didnt
matter as much), I realized the people around me who had
achieved similar successes and were on their way to achiev-
ing more didnt seem all that happy. In my case, there was
definitely hedonic adaptation: Id very quickly get used to
anything.
This led me to the conclusion, which seems trite, that happi-
ness is internal. That conclusion set me on a path of working
more on my internal self and realizing all real success is inter-
nal and has very little to do with external circumstances.
One has to do the external thing anyway. Were biologically
hard-wired. Its glib to say, You can just turn it off. Your own
life experience will bring you back to the internal path. 
The problem with getting good at a game, especially one
with big rewards, is you continue playing it long after you
should have outgrown it.
Survival and replication drive put us on the work treadmill.
Hedonic adaptation keeps us there. The trick is knowing
when to jump off and play instead.
Who do you think of as successful?
Most people think of someone as successful when they win a
game, whatever game they play themselves. If youre an athlete,
youre going to think of a top athlete. If youre in business, you
might think Elon Musk.
A few years ago, I would have said Steve Jobs, because he was
part of the driving force creating something that changed lives
for all of humanity. I think Marc Andreessen is successful, not
because of his recent incarnation as a venture capitalist, but
because of the incredible work he did with Netscape. Satoshi
Nakamoto is successful in that he created Bitcoin, which is
this incredible technological creation that will have repercus-
sions for decades to come. Of course, Elon Musk, because he
changed everyones viewpoint on what is possible with modern
technology and entrepreneurship. I consider those creators
and commercializers successful.
To me, the real winners are the ones who step out of the game
entirely, who dont even play the game, who rise above it. Those
are the people who have such internal mental and self-control
and self-awareness, they need nothing from anybody else.
There are a couple of these characters I know in my life. Jerzy
GregorekI would consider him successful because he doesnt
need anything from anybody. Hes at peace, hes healthy, and
whether he makes more money or less money compared to
the next person has no effect on his mental state.
Historically, I would say the legendary Buddha or Krish-
namurti, whose stuff I like reading, they are successful in the
sense that they step out of the game entirely. Winning or losing
does not matter to them.
Theres a line from Blaise Pascal I read. Basically, it says: All of

mans troubles arise because he cannot sit in a room quietly by
himself. If you could just sit for thirty minutes and be happy,
you are successful. That is a very powerful place to be, but very
few of us get there. 
I think of happiness as an emergent property of peace. If youre
peaceful inside and out, that will eventually result in happi-
ness. But peace is a very hard thing to come by. The irony is the
way most of us try to find peace is through war. When you start
a business, in a way, youre going to war. When you struggle
with your roommates as to who should clean the dishes, youre
going to war. Youre struggling so you can have some sense of
security and peace later.
In reality, peace is not a guarantee. Its always flowing. Its
always changing. You want to learn the core skill set of flowing
with life and accepting it in most cases. 
You can get almost anything you want out of life, as long as
its one thing and you want it far more than anything else.
In my own personal experience, the place I end up the most is
wanting to be at peace.
Peace is happiness at rest, and happiness is peace in motion.
You can convert peace into happiness anytime you want. But
peace is what you want most of the time. If youre a peaceful
person, anything you do will be a happy activity.
Today, the way we think you get peace is by resolving all your
external problems. But there are unlimited external problems.
The only way to actually get peace on the inside is by giving up
this idea of problems. 
ENVY IS THE ENEMY OF HAPPINESS
I dont think life is that hard. I think we make it hard. One of
the things Im trying to get rid of is the word should. When-
ever the word should creeps up in your mind, its guilt or
social programming. Doing something because you should
basically means you dont actually want to do it. Its just making
you miserable, so Im trying to eliminate as many shoulds
from my life as possible. 
The enemy of peace of mind is expectations drilled into you
by society and other people.
Socially, were told, Go work out. Go look good. Thats a multi-
player competitive game. Other people can see if Im doing
a good job or not. Were told, Go make money. Go buy a big
house. Again, external multiplayer competitive game. Train-
ing yourself to be happy is completely internal. There is no
external progress, no external validation. Youre competing
against yourselfit is a single-player game.
Were like bees or ants. We are such social creatures, were
externally programmed and driven. We dont know how to
play and win these single-player games anymore. We compete
purely in multiplayer games.
The reality is life is a single-player game. Youre born alone.
Youre going to die alone. All of your interpretations are alone.

All your memories are alone. Youre gone in three generations,
and nobody cares. Before you showed up, nobody cared. Its
all single player.
Perhaps one reason why yoga and meditation are hard to
sustain is they have no extrinsic value. Purely single-player
games.
Buffett has a great example when he asks if you want to be
the worlds best lover and known as the worst, or the worlds
worst lover and known as the best? [paraphrased] in refer-
ence to an inner or external scorecard.
Exactly right. All the real scorecards are internal.
Jealousy was a very hard emotion for me to overcome. When I
was young, I had a lot of jealousy. By and by, I learned to get rid
of it. It still crops up every now and then. Its such a poisonous
emotion because, at the end of the day, youre no better off with
jealousy. Youre unhappier, and the person youre jealous of is
still successful or good-looking or whatever they are.
One day, I realized with all these people I was jealous of, I
couldnt just choose little aspects of their life. I couldnt say I
want his body, I want her money, I want his personality. You
have to be that person. Do you want to actually be that person
with all of their reactions, their desires, their family, their hap-
piness level, their outlook on life, their self-image? If youre not
willing to do a wholesale, 24/7, 100 percent swap with who that
person is, then there is no point in being jealous.
Once I came to that realization, jealousy faded away because
I dont want to be anybody else. Im perfectly happy being me.
By the way, even that is under my control. To be happy being
me. Its just there are no social rewards for it. 
HAPPINESS IS BUILT BY HABITS
My most surprising discovery in the last five years is that peace
and happiness are skills. These are not things you are born
with. Yes, there is a genetic range. And a lot of it is conditioning
from your environment, but you can un-condition and recon-
dition yourself.
You can increase your happiness over time, and it starts with
believing you can do it.
Its a skill. Just like nutrition is a skill, dieting is a skill, working
out is a skill, making money is a skill, meeting girls and guys is
a skill, having good relationships is a skill, even love is a skill.
It starts with realizing theyre skills you can learn. When you
put your intention and focus on it, the world can become a
better place.
When working, surround yourself with people more
successful than you.
When playing, surround yourself with people happier than
you.
What type of skill is happiness?

Its all trial and error. You just see what works. You can try
sitting meditation. Did that work for you? Was it Tantra medi-
tation or was it Vipassana meditation? Was it a ten-day retreat
or was twenty minutes enough?
Okay. None of those worked. But what if I tried yoga? What if
I kite-surfed? What if I go car racing? What about cooking?
Does that make me Zen? You literally have to try all of these
things until you find something that works for you.
When it comes to medicines for the mind, the placebo effect is
100 percent effective. When it comes to your mind, you want
to be positively inclined, not incredulous in belief. If it is fully
internal, you should have a positive mindset.
For example, I was reading The Power of Now by Eckhart Tolle,
which is a fantastic introduction to being present, for people
who are not religious. He shows you the single-most import-
ant thing is to be present and hammers it home over and over
again until you get it.
He wrote about this body-energy exercise. You lie down and
you feel the energy moving around your body. At that point, the
old me would have put the book down and said, Well, thats
BS. But the new me said, Well, if I believe it, maybe itll work.
I went into it with a positive mindset. I laid down and tried the
meditation. You know what? It felt really good.
How does someone build the skill of happiness?
You can build good habits. Not drinking alcohol will keep your
mood more stable. Not eating sugar will keep your mood more
stable. Not going on Facebook, Snapchat, or Twitter will keep
your mood more stable. Playing video games will make you
happier in the short runand I used to be an avid gamerbut
in the long run, it could ruin your happiness. Youre being fed
dopamine and having dopamine withdrawn from you in these
little uncontrollable ways. Caffeine is another one where you
trade long term for the short term.
Essentially, you have to go through your life replacing your
thoughtless bad habits with good ones, making a commitment
to be a happier person. At the end of the day, you are a combi-
nation of your habits and the people who you spend the most
time with.
When were kids, we have very few habits. Over time, we
learn the things we are not supposed to do. We become self-
conscious. We start forming habits and routines.
Many distinctions between people who get happier as they get
older and people who dont can be explained by what habits
they have developed. Are they habits that will increase your
long-term happiness rather than your short-term happiness?
Are you surrounding yourself with people who are generally
positive and upbeat people? Are those relationships low-
maintenance? Do you admire and respect but not envy them?
Theres the five chimps theory where you can predict a
chimps behavior by the five chimps it hangs out with the most.
I think that applies to humans as well. Maybe its politically
incorrect to say you should choose your friends very wisely.
But you shouldnt choose them haphazardly based on who
you live next to or who you happen to work with. The people
who are the most happy and optimistic choose the right five
chimps. 

The first rule of handling conflict is: Dont hang around people
who constantly engage in conflict. Im not interested in any-
thing unsustainable or even hard to sustain, including difficult
relationships. 
If you cant see yourself working with someone for life, dont
work with them for a day.
Theres a friend of mine, a Persian guy named Behzad. He just
loves life, and he has no time for anybody who is not happy.
If you ask Behzad whats his secret? Hell just look up and say,
Stop asking why and start saying wow. The world is such an
amazing place. As humans, were used to taking everything for
granted. Like what you and I are doing right now. Were sitting
indoors, wearing clothes, well-fed, and communicating with
each other through space and time. We should be two monkeys
sitting in the jungle right now watching the sun going down,
asking ourselves where we are going to sleep.
When we get something, we assume the world owes it to us.
If youre present, youll realize how many gifts and how much
abundance there is around us at all times. Thats all you really
need to do. Im here now, and I have all these incredible things
at my disposal. 
The most important trick to being happy is to realize happi-
ness is a skill you develop and a choice you make. You choose to
be happy, and then you work at it. Its just like building muscles.
Its just like losing weight. Its just like succeeding at your job.
Its just like learning calculus.
You decide its important to you. You prioritize it above every-
thing else. You read everything on the topic. 
HAPPINESS HABITS
I have a series of tricks I use to try and be happier in the
moment. At first, they were silly and difficult and required a
lot of attention, but now some of them have become second
nature. By doing them religiously, Ive managed to increase my
happiness level quite a bit.
The obvious one is meditationinsight meditation. Working
toward a specific purpose on it, which is to try and understand
how my mind works. 
Just being very aware in every moment. If I catch myself judg-
ing somebody, I can stop myself and say, Whats the positive
interpretation of this? I used to get annoyed about things.
Now I always look for the positive side of it. It used to take a
rational effort. It used to take a few seconds for me to come up
with a positive. Now I can do it sub-second. 
I try to get more sunlight on my skin. I look up and smile. 
Every time you catch yourself desiring something, say, Is it so
importanttomeIllbeunhappyunlessthisgoesmyway?Youre
goingtofindwiththevastmajorityofthingsitsjustnottrue.
I think dropping caffeine made me happier. It makes me more
of a stable person. 
I think working out every day made me happier. If you have
peace of body, its easier to have peace of mind. 

The more you judge, the more you separate yourself. Youll
feel good for an instant, because you feel good about yourself,
thinking youre better than someone. Later, youre going to
feel lonely. Then, you see negativity everywhere. The world
just reflects your own feelings back at you. 
Tell your friends youre a happy person. Then, youll be forced
to conform to it. Youll have a consistency bias. You have to live
up to it. Your friends will expect you to be a happy person. 
Recover time and happiness by minimizing your use of these
three smartphone apps: phone, calendar, and alarm clock. 
The more secrets you have, the less happy youre going to
be. 
Caught in a funk? Use meditation, music, and exercise to reset
your mood. Then choose a new path to commit emotional
energy for rest of day. 
Hedonic adaptation is more powerful for man-made things
(cars, houses, clothes, money) than for natural things (food,
sex, exercise). 
No exceptionsall screen activities linked to less happiness,
all non-screen activities linked to more happiness. 
A personal metric: how much of the day is spent doing things
out of obligation rather than out of interest? 
Its the news job to make you anxious and angry. But its under-
lying scientific, economic, education, and conflict trends are
positive. Stay optimistic. 
Politics, academia, and social status are all zero-sum games.
Positive-sum games create positive people. 
Increase serotonin in the brain without drugs: Sunlight, exer-
cise, positive thinking, and tryptophan. 
CHANGING HABITS:
Pick one thing. Cultivate a desire. Visualize it.
Plan a sustainable path.
Identify needs, triggers, and substitutes.
Tell your friends.
Track meticulously.
Self-discipline is a bridge to a new self-image.
Bake in the new self-image. Its who you arenow. 
First, you know it. Then, you understand it. Then, you can
explain it. Then, you can feel it. Finally, you are it.
FIND HAPPINESS IN ACCEPTANCE
In any situation in life, you always have three choices: you can
change it, you can accept it, or you can leave it.
If you want to change it, then it is a desire. It will cause you

suffering until you successfully change it. So dont pick too
many of those. Pick one big desire in your life at any given time
to give yourself purpose and motivation.
Why not two?
Youll be distracted.
Even one is hard enough. Being peaceful comes from having
your mind clear of thoughts. And a lot of clarity comes from
being in the present moment. Its very hard to be in the present
moment if youre thinking, I need to do this. I want that. This
has got to change. 
You always have three options: you can change it, you can
accept it, or you can leave it. What is not a good option is to
sit around wishing you would change it but not changing it,
wishing you could leave it but not leaving it and not accept-
ing it. That struggle or aversion is responsible for most of our
misery. The phrase I probably use the most to myself in my
head is just one word: accept. 
What does acceptance look like to you?
Its to be okay whatever the outcome is. Its to be balanced and
centered.Itstostepbackandtoseethegranderschemeofthings.
We dont always get what we want, but sometimes what is hap-
pening is for the best. The sooner you can accept it as a reality,
the sooner you can adapt to it.
Achieving acceptance is very difficult. I have a couple of hacks
I try, but I wouldnt say they are totally successful.
One hack is stepping back and looking at previous bits of
suffering Ive had in my life. I write them down. Last time
you broke up with somebody, last time you had a business
failure, last time you had a health issue, what happened? I
can trace the growth and improvement that came from it
years later.
I have another hack I use for minor annoyances. When they
happen, a part of me will instantly react negatively. But Ive
learned to mentally ask myself, What is the positive of this
situation?
Okay, Ill be late for a meeting. But what is the benefit to me?
I get to relax and watch the birds for a moment. Ill also spend
less time in that boring meeting. Theres almost always some-
thing positive.
Even if you cant come up with something positive, you can say,
Well, the Universe is going to teach me something now. Now
I get to listen and learn.
To give you the simplest example: I was at an event and after-
ward, someone flooded my inbox with a whole bunch of photos
they took.
There was a tiny instant judgment saying, Come on, couldnt
you have just selected a few of the best? Who sends a hun-
dred photos? But then immediately I asked myself, What is
the positive? The positive is that I get to pick my five favorite
photos. I get to use my judgment.
Overthelastyear,bypracticingthishackenough,Ivemanaged
to go from taking a couple of seconds to think of a response, to

now my brain doing it almost instantaneously. Thats a habit
you can train yourself to do. 
How do you learn to accept things you cant change?
Fundamentally, it boils down to one big hack: embracing death.
Death is the most important thing that is ever going to happen
to you. When you look at your death and you acknowledge it,
rather than running away from it, itll bring great meaning to
your life. We spend so much of our life trying to avoid death.
So much of what we struggle for can be classified as a quest
for immortality.
If youre religious and believe there is an afterlife, then youll
be taken care of. If youre not religious, maybe youll have kids.
If youre an artist, a painter, or a businessman, you want to
leave a legacy behind.
Heres a hot tip: There is no legacy. Theres nothing to leave.
Were all going to be gone. Our children will be gone. Our works
will be dust. Our civilizations will be dust. Our planet will be
dust. Our solar system will be dust. In the grand scheme of
things, the Universe has been around for ten billion years. Itll
be around for another ten billion years.
Your life is a firefly blink in a night. Youre here for such a brief
period of time. If you fully acknowledge the futility of what
youre doing, then I think it can bring great happiness and
peace because you realize this is a game. But its a fun game. All
that matters is you experience your reality as you go through
life. Why not interpret it in the most positive possible way?
Any moment where youre not having a great time, when youre
not really happy, youre not doing anyone any favors. Its not
like your unhappiness makes them better off somehow. All
youre doing is wasting this incredibly small and precious time
you have on this Earth. Keeping death on the forefront and not
denying it is very important.
Whenever I get caught up in my ego battles, I just think of
entire civilizations that have come and gone. For example, take
the Sumerians. Im sure they were important people and did
great things, but go ahead and name me a single Sumerian.
Tell me anything interesting or important Sumerians did that
lasted. Nothing.
So maybe ten thousand years from now or a hundred thou-
sand years from now, people will say, Oh yeah, Americans.
Ive heard of Americans. 
Youre going to die one day, and none of this is going to matter.
So enjoy yourself. Do something positive. Project some love.
Make someone happy. Laugh a little bit. Appreciate the
moment. And do your work. 

E
A
S
Y
C
H
O
I
C
E
S
,
H
A
R
D
L
I
F
E
.
H
A
R
D
C
H
O
I
C
E
S
,
E
A
S
Y
L
I
F
E
.
SAVING YOURSELF
Doctors wont make you healthy.
Nutritionists wont make you slim.
Teachers wont make you smart.
Gurus wont make you calm.
Mentors wont make you rich.
Trainers wont make you fit.
Ultimately, you have to take responsibility.
Save yourself.

CHOOSING TO BE YOURSELF
A lot of what goes on today is what many of you are doing right
nowbeating yourself up and scribbling notes and saying, I
need to do this, and I need to do that, and I need to do No,
you dont need to do anything.
All you should do is what you want to do. If you stop trying to
figure out how to do things the way other people want you to
do them, you get to listen to the little voice inside your head
that wants to do things a certain way. Then, you get to be you.
I never met my greatest mentor. I wanted so much to be like
him. But his message was the opposite: Be yourself, with
passionate intensity.
No one in the world is going to beat you at being you. Youre
never going to be as good at being me as I am. Im never going
to be as good at being you as you are. Certainly, listen and
absorb, but dont try to emulate. Its a fools errand. Instead,
each person is uniquely qualified at something. They have
some specific knowledge, capability, and desire nobody else
in the world does, purely from the combinatorics of human
DNA and development.
The combinatorics of human DNA and experience are
staggering. You will never meet any two humans who are
substitutable for each other.
Your goal in life is to find the people, business, project, or art
that needs you the most. There is something out there just for
you. What you dont want to do is build checklists and deci-
sion frameworks built on what other people are doing. Youre
never going to be them. Youll never be good at being somebody
else. 

To make an original contribution, you have to be irrationally
obsessed with something.
CHOOSING TO CARE FOR YOURSELF
My number one priority in life, above my happiness, above
my family, above my work, is my own health. It starts with
my physical health. Second, its my mental health. Third, its
my spiritual health. Then, its my familys health. Then, its my
familys wellbeing. After that, I can go out and do whatever I
need to do with the rest of the world. 
Nothing like a health problem to turn up the contrast dial for
the rest of life.
What about the modern world steers us away from the way
humans are meant to live?
There are many, many things.
There are a number on the physical side. We have diets we are
not evolved to eat. A correct diet should probably look closer
to a paleo diet, mostly eating vegetables with a small amount
of meat and berries.
In terms of exercise, were probably meant to play instead of
running on a treadmill. Were probably evolved to use all of
our five senses equally as opposed to favoring the visual cortex.
In modern society, almost all of our inputs and communica-
tion are visual. Were not meant to walk in shoes. A lot of back
and foot problems come from shoes. Were not meant to have
clothes keep us warm all of the time. Were meant to have some
cold exposure. It kickstarts your immune system.
Were not evolved to live in a perfectly sterile and clean envi-

ronment. It leads to allergies and an untrained immune system.
This is known as the hygiene hypothesis. Were evolved to live
in much smaller tribes and to have more family around us. I
partially grew up in India, and in India, everybody is in your
business. Theres a cousin, an aunt, an uncle who is in your face,
which makes it hard to be depressed, because you are never
alone. (Im not referring to people with chemical depression.
Im talking more about the existential angst and malaise teen-
agers seem to go through.) But on the other hand, you have no
privacy, so you cant be free. There are trade-offs.
Were not meant to check our phone every five minutes. The
constant mood swings of getting a like then an angry com-
ment makes us into anxious creatures. We evolved for scarcity
but live in abundance. Theres a constant struggle to say no
when your genes always want to say yes. Yes to sugar. Yes to
staying in this relationship. Yes to alcohol. Yes to drugs. Yes,
yes, yes. Our bodies dont know how to say no. 
When everyone is sick, we no longer consider it a disease.
DIET
Outside of math, physics, and chemistry, there isnt much
settled science. Were still arguing over what the optimal
diet is.
Do you have an opinion on the ketogenic diet?
It seems really difficult to follow. It makes sense for the brain
and the body to have a backup mechanism. For example, in
the Ice Ages, humans evolved without many plants available.
At the same time, we have been eating plants for thousands
of yearsI dont think plants are bad for you, but something
closer to the paleo diet is probably correct.
I think the interplay between sugar and fat is really interesting.
Fat is what makes you satiated. Fatty foods make you feel full.
The easiest way to feel full is to go on a ketogenic diet, where
youre eating tons of bacon all the time, and youre going to feel
almost nauseous and not want to look at fat anymore.
Sugar makes you hungry. Sugar signals to your body, Theres
this incredible food resource in the environment were not
evolved for, so you rush out to get sugar. The problem is the
sugar effect dominates the fat effect. If you eat a fatty meal and
you throw some sugar in, the sugar is going to deliver hunger
and fat is going to deliver the calories and youre just going
to binge. Thats why all desserts are large combinations of fat
and carbs together.
In nature, its very rare to find carbs and fat together. In nature,
I find carbs and fat together in coconuts, in mangoes, maybe
in bananas, but its basically tropical fruits. The combination
of sugar and fat together is really deadly. Youve got to watch
out for that in your diet.
Im not an expert, and the problem is diet and nutrition are like
politics: everybody thinks theyre an expert. Their identity is
wrapped up in it because what theyve been eating or what they
think they should be eating is obviously the correct answer.
Everybody has a little religionits just a really difficult topic

to talk about. I will just say in general, any sensible diet avoids
the combination of sugar and fat together. 
Dietary fat drives satiety. Dietary sugar drives hunger. The
sugar effect dominates. Control your appetite accordingly.
Most fit and healthy people focus much more on what they eat
than how much. Quality control is easier than (and leads to)
quantity control. 
Ironically, fasting (from a low-carb/paleo base) is easier than
portion control. Once the body detects food, it overrides the
brain. 
What I wonder about Wonder Bread is how it can stay soft at
room temperature for months. If bacteria wont eat it, should
you? 
It has been five thousand years, and were still arguing over
whether meat is poisonous or plants are poisonous. Ditch
the extremists and any food invented in the last few hundred
years. 
When it comes to medicine and nutrition, subtract before you
add. 
My trainer sends me photos of his meals, and it reminds me
we are all flavor addicts. 
Worlds simplest diet: The more processed the food, the less
one should consume.
EXERCISE
The harder the workout, the easier the day.
What habit would you say most positively impacts your life?
The daily morning workout. That has been a complete game-
changer. Its made me feel healthier, younger. Its made me not
go out late. It came from one simple thing, which is everybody
says, I dont have time. Basically, whenever you throw any
so-called good habit at somebody, theyll have an excuse for
themselves. Usually the most common is I dont have time.
I dont have time is just another way of saying Its not a pri-
ority. What you really have to do is say whether it is a priority
or not. If something is your number one priority, then you will
do it. Thats just the way life works. If youve got a fuzzy basket
of ten or fifteen different priorities, youre going to end up
getting none of them.
What I did was decide my number one priority in life, above
my happiness, above my family, above my work, is my own
health. It starts with my physical health.  Because my physi-
cal health became my number one priority, then I could never
say I dont have time. In the morning, I work out, and however
long it takes is how long it takes. I do not start my day until Ive
worked out. I dont care if the world is imploding and melt-

ing down, it can wait another thirty minutes until Im done
working out.
Its pretty much every day. There are a few days where Ive had
to take a break because Im traveling, or Im injured or sick or
something. I can count on one hand the number of breaks I
take every year. 
One month of consistent yoga and I feel 10 years younger. To
stay flexible is to stay young.
How you make a habit doesnt matter. Do something every
day. It almost doesnt matter what you do. The people who are
obsessing over whether to do weight training, tennis, Pilates,
the high-intensity interval training method, The Happy Body,
or whatever. Theyre missing the point. The important thing is
to do something every day. It doesnt matter what it is. The best
workout for you is one youre excited enough to do every day. 
Walking meetings:
 Brain works better
 Exercise & sunlight
 Shorter, less pleasantries
 More dialogue, less monologue
 No slides
 End easily by walking back
Like everything in life, if you are willing to make the short-term
sacrifice, youll have the long-term benefit. My physical trainer
(Jerzy Gregorek) is a really wise, brilliant guy. He always says,
Easy choices, hard life. Hard choices, easy life.
Basically, if you are making the hard choices right now in what
to eat, youre not eating all the junk food you want, and making
the hard choice to work out. So, your life long-term will be
easy. You wont be sick. You wont be unhealthy. The same is
true of values. The same is true of saving up for a rainy day.
The same is true of how you approach your relationships. If
you make the easy choices right now, your overall life will
be a lot harder. 
MEDITATION
IS
INTERMITTENT
FASTING
FOR THE MIND.

MEDITATION + MENTAL STRENGTH
An emotion is our evolved biology predicting the future
impact of a current event. In modern settings, its usually
exaggerated or wrong.
Why is meditation so powerful?
Your breath is one of the few places where your autonomic
nervous system meets your voluntary nervous system. Its
involuntary, but you can also control it.
I think a lot of meditation practices put an emphasis on the
breath because it is a gateway into your autonomic nervous
system. There are many, many cases in the medical and spiri-
tual literature of people controlling their bodies at levels that
should be autonomous.
Your mind is such a powerful thing. Whats so unusual about
your forebrain sending signals to your hindbrain and your
hindbrain routing resources to your entire body?
You can do it just by breathing. Relaxed breathing tells your
body youre safe. Then, your forebrain doesnt need as many
resources as it normally does. Now, the extra energy can be
sent to your hindbrain, and it can reroute those resources to
the rest of your body.
Im not saying you can beat whatever illness you have just
because you activated your hindbrain. But youre devoting
most of the energy normally required to care about the exter-
nal environment to the immune system.
I highly recommend listening to the Tim Ferrisss podcast with
Wim Hof. He is a walking miracle. Wims nickname is the Ice
Man. He holds the world record for the longest time spent in
an ice bath and swimming in freezing cold water. I was very
inspired by him, not only because hes capable of super-human
physical feats, but because he does it while being incredibly
kind and happywhich is not easy to accomplish.
He advocates cold exposure, because he believes people are
too separate from their natural environment. Were constantly
clothed, fed, and warm. Our bodies have lost touch with the
cold. The cold is important because it can activate the immune
system.
So, he advocates taking long ice baths. Being from the Indian
subcontinent, Im strongly against the idea of ice baths. But
Wim inspired me to give cold showers a try. And I did so by
using the Wim Hof breathing method. It involves hyperventi-
lating to get more oxygen into your blood, which raises your
core temperature. Then, you can go into the shower.
The first few cold showers were hilarious because Id slowly
ease myself in, wincing the entire way. I started about four or
five months ago. Now, I turn the shower on full-blast, and then
I walk right in. I dont give myself any time to hesitate. As soon
as I hear the voice in my head telling me how cold its going to
be, I know I have to walk in.
I learned a very important lesson from this: most of our suffer-
ing comes from avoidance. Most of the suffering from a cold
shower is the tip-toeing your way in. Once youre in, youre
in. Its not suffering. Its just cold. Your body saying its cold is
different than your mind saying its cold. Acknowledge your

body saying its cold. Look at it. Deal with it. Accept it, but dont
mentally suffer over it. Taking a cold shower for two minutes
isnt going to kill you.
Having a cold shower helps you re-learn that lesson every
morning. Now hot showers are just one less thing I need out
of life. 
Meditation is intermittent fasting for the mind.
Too much sugar leads to a heavy body, and too many
distractions lead to a heavy mind.
Time spent undistracted and alone, in self-examination,
journaling, meditation, resolves the unresolved and takes us
from mentally fat to fit.
Do you have a current meditation practice?
I think meditation is like dieting, where everyone is supposedly
following a regimen. Everyone says they do it, but nobody actu-
ally does it. The real set of people who meditate on a regular
basis, Ive found, are pretty rare. Ive identified and tried at
least four different forms of meditation.
The one I found works best for me is called Choiceless Aware-
ness, or Nonjudgmental Awareness. As youre going about your
daily business (hopefully, theres some nature) and youre not
talking to anybody else, you practice learning to accept the
moment youre in without making judgments. You dont think,
Oh, theres a homeless guy over there, better cross the street
or look at someone running by and say, Hes out of shape, and
Im in better shape than him.
If I saw a guy with a bad hair day, I would at first think Haha,
he has a bad hair day. Well, why am I laughing at him to make
me feel better about myself? And why am I trying to make me
feel better about my own hair? Because Im losing my hair, and
Im afraid its going to go away. What I find is 90 percent of
thoughts I have are fear-based. The other 10 percent may be
desire-based.
You dont make any decisions. You dont judge anything. You
just accept everything. If I do that for ten or fifteen minutes
while walking around, I end up in a very peaceful, grateful state.
Choiceless Awareness works well for me. 
You could also do transcendental meditation, which is where
youre using repetitive chanting to create a white noise in your
head to bury your thoughts. Or, you can just very keenly and
very alertly be aware of your thoughts as they happen. As you
watch your thoughts, you realize how many of them are fear-
based. The moment you recognize a fear, without even trying
it goes away. After a while, your mind quiets.
When your mind quiets, you stop taking everything around you
for granted. You start to notice the details. You think, Wow,
I live in such a beautiful place. Its so great that I have clothes,
and I can go to Starbucks and get a coffee anytime. Look at
these peopleeach one has a perfectly valid and complete life
going on in their own heads.
It pops us out of the story were constantly telling ourselves. If
you stop talking to yourself for even ten minutes, if you stop

obsessing over your own story, youll realize we are really far
up Maslows hierarchy of needs, and life is pretty good. 
Life-hack: When in bed, meditate. Either you will have a
deep meditation or fall asleep. Victory either way.
Another method Ive learned is to just sit there and you close
your eyes for at least one hour a day. You surrender to what-
ever happensdont make any effort whatsoever. You make no
effort for something, and you make no effort against anything.
If there are thoughts running through your mind, you let the
thoughts run.
For your entire life, things have been happening to you. Some
good, some bad, most of which you have processed and dis-
solved, but a few stuck with you. Over time, more and more
stuck with you, and they almost became like these barnacles
stuck to you.
You lost your childhood sense of wonder and of being present
and happy. You lost your inner happiness because you built up
this personality of unresolved pain, errors, fears, and desires
that glommed onto you like a bunch of barnacles.
How do you get those barnacles off you? What happens in
meditation is youre sitting there and not resisting your mind.
These things will start bubbling up. Its like a giant inbox of
unanswered emails, going back to your childhood. They will
come out one by one, and you will be forced to deal with them.
You will be forced to resolve them. Resolving them doesnt take
any workyou just observe them. Now youre an adult with
some distance, time, and space from previous events, and you
can just resolve them. You can be much more objective about
how you view them.
Over time, you will resolve a lot of these deep-seated unre-
solved things you have in your mind. Once theyre resolved,
there will come a day when you sit down to meditate, and youll
hit a mental inbox zero. When you open your mental email
and there are none, that is a pretty amazing feeling.
Its a state of joy and bliss and peace. Once you have it, you
dont want to give it up. If you can get a free hour of bliss every
morning just by sitting and closing your eyes, that is worth its
weight in gold. It will change your life.
I recommend meditating one hour each morning because any-
thing less is not enough time to really get deep into it. I would
recommend if you really want to try meditation, try sixty days
of one hour a day, first thing in the morning. After about sixty
days, you will be tired of listening to your own mind. You will
have resolved a lot of issues, or you have heard them enough
to see through those fears and issues.
Meditation isnt hard. All you have to do is sit there and do
nothing. Just sit down. Close your eyes and say, Im just going
to give myself a break for an hour. This is my hour off from life.
This is the hour Im not going to do anything.
If thoughts come, thoughts come. Im not going to fight them.
Im not going to embrace them. Im not going to think harder
about them. Im not going to reject them. Im just going to
sit here for an hour with my eyes closed, and Im going to do

nothing. How hard is that? Why can you not do anything for
an hour? Whats so hard about giving yourself an hour-long
break? 
Was there a moment you realized you could control how you
interpreted things? I think one problem people have is not
recognizingtheycancontrolhowtheyinterpretandrespond
to a situation.
I think everyone knows its possible. Theres a great Osho lec-
ture, titled The Attraction for Drugs Is Spiritual. He talks
about why do people do drugs (everything from alcohol to psy-
chedelics to cannabis). Theyre doing it to control their mental
state. Theyre doing it to control how they react. Some people
drink because it helps them not care as much, or theyre pot-
heads because they can zone out, or they do psychedelics to
feel very present or connected to nature. The attraction of
drugs is spiritual.
All of society does this to some extent. People chasing thrills
in action sports or flow states or orgasmsany of these states
people strive for are people trying to get out of their own heads.
Theyre trying to get away from the voice in their headsthe
overdeveloped sense of self.
At the very least, I do not want my sense of self to continue to
develop and strengthen as I get older. I want it to be weaker
and more muted so I can be more in present everyday reality,
accept nature and the world for what it is, and appreciate it
very much as a child would. 
The first thing to realize is you can observe your mental state.
Meditation doesnt mean youre suddenly going to gain the
superpower to control your internal state. The advantage of
meditation is recognizing just how out of control your mind
is. It is like a monkey flinging feces, running around the room,
making trouble, shouting, and breaking things. Its completely
uncontrollable. Its an out-of-control madperson.
You have to see this mad creature in operation before you feel a
certain distaste toward it and start separating yourself from it.
In that separation is liberation. You realize, Oh, I dont want to
be that person. Why am I so out of control? Awareness alone
calms you down. 
Insight meditation lets you run your brain in debug mode until
you realize youre just a subroutine in a larger program.
I try to keep an eye on my internal monologue. It doesnt always
work. In the computer programming sense, I try to run my
brain in debugging mode as much as possible. When Im
talking to someone, or when Im engaged in a group activity,
its almost impossible because your brain has too many things
to handle. If Im by myself, like just this morning, Im brushing
my teeth and I start thinking forward to a podcast. I started
going through this little fantasy where I imagined Shane asking
me a bunch of questions and I was fantasy- answering them.
Then, I caught myself. I put my brain in debug mode and just
watched every little instruction go by.
I said, Why am I fantasy-future planning? Why cant I just
stand here and brush my teeth? Its the awareness my brain
was running off in the future and planning some fantasy sce-
nario out of ego. I was like, Well, do I really care if I embarrass

myself? Who cares? Im going to die anyway. This is all going to
go to zero, and I wont remember anything, so this is pointless.
Then, I shut down, and I went back to brushing my teeth. I
was noticing how good the toothbrush was and how good it
felt. Then the next moment, Im off to thinking something else.
I have to look at my brain again and say, Do I really need to
solve this problem right now?
Ninety-five percent of what my brain runs off and tries to do,
I dont need to tackle in that exact moment. If the brain is like
a muscle, Ill be better off resting it, being at peace. When a
particular problem arises, Ill immerse myself in it.
Right now as were talking, Id rather dedicate myself to being
completely lost in the conversation and to being 100 percent
focused on this as opposed to thinking about Oh, when I
brushed my teeth, did I do it the right way?
Theabilitytosingularlyfocusisrelatedtotheabilitytoloseyour-
self and be present, happy, and (ironically) more effective. 
Its almost like youre taking yourself out of a certain frame
and youre watching things from a different perspective even
though youre in your own mind.
Buddhists talk about awareness versus the ego. Theyre really
talking about how you can think of your brain, your con-
sciousness, as a multilayered mechanism. Theres a core-base,
kernel-level OS running. Then, there are applications running
on top. (I like to think of it as computer and geek speak.)
Im actually going back to my awareness level of OS, which is
always calm, always peaceful, and generally happy and con-
tent. Im trying to stay in awareness mode and not activate
the monkey mind, which is always worried, frightened, and
anxious. It serves incredible purpose, but I try not to activate
the monkey mind until I need it. When I need it, I want to just
focus on that. If I run it 24/7, I waste energy and the monkey
mind becomes me. I am more than my monkey mind.
Another thing: spirituality, religion, Buddhism, or anything
you follow will teach you over time you are more than just your
mind. You are more than just your habits. You are more than
just your preferences. Youre a level of awareness. Youre a body.
Modern humans, we dont live enough in our bodies. We dont
live enough in our awareness. We live too much in this internal
monologue in our heads. All of which is just programmed into
you by society and by the environment when you were younger.
You are basically a bunch of DNA that reacted to environmental
effects when you were younger. You recorded the good and bad
experiences, and you use them to prejudge everything thrown
against you. Then youre using those experiences, constantly
trying and predict and change the future.
As you get older, the sum of preferences youve accumulated is
very, very large. These habitual reactions end up as runaway
freight trains controlling your mood. We should control our
own moods. Why dont we study how to control our moods?
What a masterful thing it would be if you could say, Right
now I would like to be in the curious state, and then you can
genuinely get yourself into the curious state. Or say, I want to
be in a mourning state. Im mourning a loved one, and I want to
grieve for them. I really want to feel that. I dont want to be dis-
tracted by a computer programming problem due tomorrow.

The mind itself is a muscleit can be trained and condi-
tioned. It has been haphazardly conditioned by society to be
out of our control. If you look at your mind with awareness
and intent (a 24/7 job youre working at every moment) I think
you can unpack your own mind, your emotions, thoughts, and
reactions. Then you can start reconfiguring. You can start
rewriting this program to what you want. 
Meditation is turning off society and listening to yourself.
It only works when done for its own sake.
Hiking is walking meditation.
Journaling is writing meditation.
Praying is gratitude meditation.
Showering is accidental meditation.
Sitting quietly is direct meditation.
CHOOSING TO BUILD YOURSELF
The greatest superpower is the ability to change yourself.
Whats the biggest mistake youve made in your life and how
did you recover?
Ive made a class of mistakes I would summarize the same way.
The mistakes were obvious only in hindsight through one exer-
cise, which is asking yourself: when youre thirty, what advice
would you give your twenty-year-old self? And when youre
forty, what advice would you give your thirty-year-old self?
(Maybe if youre younger, you can do it by every five years.)
Sit down and say, Okay, 2007, what was I doing? How was I
feeling? 2008, what was I doing? How was I feeling? 2009, what
was I doing? How was I feeling?
Life is going to play out the way its going to play out. There
will be some good and some bad. Most of it is actually just up
to your interpretation. Youre born, you have a set of sensory
experiences, and then you die. How you choose to interpret
those experiences is up to you, and different people interpret
them in different ways.
Really, I wish I had done all of the same things, but with less
emotion and less anger. The most celebrated example would
be when I was younger, I started a company. This company did
well, but I didnt do well, so I sued some of the people involved.
It was a good outcome for me in the end, and everything
worked out okay, but there was a lot of angst and a lot of anger.
Today, I wouldnt have the angst and the anger. I would have
just walked up to the people and said, Look, this is what hap-
pened. This is what Im going to do. This is how Im going to
do it. This is whats fair. This is whats not.
I would have realized the anger and emotions are a huge, com-
pletely unnecessary consequence. Now, Im trying to learn
from that and do the same things I think are the right things
to do but without anger and with a very long-term point of

view. If you take a very long-term point of view and take the
emotion out of it, I wouldnt consider those things mistakes
anymore. 
Again, habits are everythingeverything we are. We are
trained in habits from when we are children, including potty
training, when to cry and when not to, how to smile and when
not to. These things become habitsbehaviors we learn and
integrate into ourselves.
When were older, were a collection of thousands of habits
constantly running subconsciously. We have a little bit of extra
brainpower in our neocortex for solving new problems. You
become your habits.
This came to light for me when my trainer gave me a routine
to do every single day. I had never worked out every single day
before. Its a light workout. Its not tough on your body, but
I did this workout every single day. I realized the incredible,
astonishing transformation it had on me both physically and
mentally.
To have peace of mind, you have to have peace of body first.
This taught me the power of habits. I started realizing its all
about habits. At any given time, Im either trying to pick up a
good habit or discard a previous bad habit. It takes time.
If someone says, I want to be fit, I want to be healthy. Right
now, Im out of shape and Im fat. Well, nothing sustainable is
going to work for you in three months. Its going to be at least
a ten-year journey. Every six months (depending on how fast
you can do it), youre going to break bad habits and pick up
good habits. 
One of the things Krishnamurti talks about is being in an inter-
nal state of revolution. You should always be internally ready
for a complete change. Whenever we say were going to try to
do something or try to form a habit, were wimping out.
Were just saying to ourselves, Im going to buy myself some
more time. The reality is when our emotions want us to do
something, we just do it. If you want to go approach a pretty
girl, if you want to have a drink, if you really desire something,
you just go do it.
When you say, Im going to do this, and Im going to be that,
youre really putting it off. Youre giving yourself an out. At least
if youre self-aware, you can think, I say I want to do this, but I
dont really because if I really wanted to do it, I would just do it.
Commit externally to enough people. For example, if you want
to quit smoking, all you have to do is go to everybody you know
and say, I quit smoking. I did it. I give you my word.
Thats all you need to do. Go ahead, right? But most of us say
were not quite ready. We know we dont want to commit our-
selves externally. Its important to be honest with yourself and
say, Okay, Im not ready to give up smoking. I like it too much,
it is going to be too hard for me to give up.
Say instead, Ill set a more reasonable goal for myself; Ill cut
down to the following amount. I can commit to that externally.
Im going to work on that for three or six months. When I get

there, Ill take the next step, as opposed to beating myself up
over it.
When you really want to change, you just change. But most of
us dont really want to changewe dont want to go through
the pain just yet. At least recognize it, be aware of it, and give
yourself a smaller change you can actually carry out. 
Impatience with actions, patience with results.
Anything you have to do, just get it done. Why wait? Youre not
getting any younger. Your life is slipping away. You dont want
to spend it waiting in line. You dont want to spend it traveling
back and forth. You dont want to spend it doing things you
know ultimately arent part of your mission.
When you do them, you want to do them as quickly as you can
while doing them well with your full attention. But then, you
just have to be patient with the results because youre dealing
with complex systems and many people.
It takes a long time for markets to adopt products. It takes
time for people to get comfortable working with each other.
It takes time for great products to emerge as you polish away,
polish away, polish away. Impatience with actions, patience
with results. As Nivi said, inspiration is perishable. When you
have inspiration, act on it right then and there. 
ACTIONS
TIME
RESULTS
CHOOSING TO GROW YOURSELF
I dont believe in specific goals. Scott Adams famously said,
Set up systems, not goals. Use your judgment to figure out
what kinds of environments you can thrive in, and then create
an environment around you so youre statistically likely to
succeed.
The current environment programs the brain, but the clever
brain can choose its upcoming environment.
Im not going to be the most successful person on the planet,
nor do I want to be. I just want to be the most successful ver-
sion of myself while working the least hard possible. I want
to live in a way that if my life played out 1,000 times, Naval is
successful 999 times. Hes not a billionaire, but he does pretty
well each time. He may not have nailed life in every regard, but
he sets up systems so hes failed in very few places. 

Remember I started as a poor kid in India, right? If I can make
it, anybody can, in that sense. Obviously, I had all my limbs, my
mental faculties, and I did have an education. There are some
prerequisites you cant get past. But if youre reading this book,
you probably have the requisite means at your disposal, which
is a functioning body and a functioning mind. 
If theres something you want to do later, do it now. There is
no later.
How do you personally learn about new subjects?
Mostly, I just stay on the basics. Even when I learn physics or
science, I stick to the basics. I read concepts for fun. Im more
likely to do something that has arithmetic in it than calculus.
I wont be a great physicist at this point. Maybe in the next
lifetime or my kid will do it, but its too late for me. I have to
stick to what I enjoy.
Scienceis,tome,thestudyoftruth.Itistheonlytruediscipline
because it makes falsifiable predictions. It actually changes the
world. Applied science becomes technology, and technology
is what separates us from the animals and allows us to have
things like cell phones, houses, cars, heat, and electricity.
Science, to me, is the study of truth and mathematics is the
language of science and nature.
Im not religious, but Im spiritual. To me, that is the most devo-
tional thing that I could do, to study the laws of the Universe.
The same kick that someone might get out of being in Mecca
or Medina and bowing to the prophet, I get the same feeling
of awe and small sense of self when I study science. For me,
its unparalleled and Id rather stay at the basics. This is the
beauty of reading. 
DoyouagreewiththeideaIfyoureadwhateverybodyelseis
reading,youregoingtothinkwhateveryoneelseisthinking?
I think almost everything that people read these days is
designed for social approval. 
I know people who have read one hundred regurgitated books
on evolution and theyve never read Darwin. Think of the
number of macroeconomists out there. I think most of them
have read tons of treatises in economics but havent read any
Adam Smith.
At some level, youre doing it for social approval. Youre doing
it to fit in with the other monkeys. Youre fitting in to get along
with the herd. Thats not where the returns are in life. The
returns in life are being out of the herd.
Social approval is inside the herd. If you want social approval,
definitely go read what the herd is reading. It takes a level of
contrarianism to say, Nope. Im just going to do my own thing.
Regardless of the social outcome, I will learn anything I think
is interesting.
Do you think theres some loss aversion there? Because once
you diverge, youre not sure if youre diverging toward a pos-
itive outcome or a negative outcome?
Absolutely. I think thats why the smartest and the most suc-

cessful people I know started out as losers. If you view yourself
as a loser, as someone who was cast out by society and has no
role in normal society, then you will do your own thing and
youre much more likely to find a winning path. It helps to
start out by saying, Im never going to be popular. Im never
going to be accepted. Im already a loser. Im not going to get
what all the other kids have. Ive just got to be happy being me.
For self-improvement without self-discipline, update your
self-image.
Everyonesmotivatedatsomething.Itjustdependsonthething.
Eventhepeoplethatwesayareunmotivatedaresuddenlyreally
motivatedwhentheyreplayingvideogames.Ithinkmotivation
is relative, so you just have to find the thing youre into. 
Grind and sweat, toil and bleed, face the abyss. Its all part
of becoming an overnight success.
If you had to pass down to your kids one or two principles,
what would they be?
Number one: read. Read everything you can. And not just the
stuff that society tells you is good or even books that I tell you
to read. Just read for its own sake. Develop a love for it. Even
if you have to read romance novels or paperbacks or comic
books. Theres no such thing as junk. Just read it all. Eventually,
youll guide yourself to the things that you should and want to
be reading.
Related to the skill of reading are the skills of mathematics
and persuasion. Both skills help you to navigate through the
real world.
Having the skill of persuasion is important because if you can
influence your fellow human beings, you can get a lot done. I
think persuasion is an actual skill. So you can learn it, and its
not that hard to do so.
Mathematics helps with all the complex and difficult things
in life. If you want to make money, if you want to do sci-
ence, if you want to understand game theory or politics or
economics or investments or computers, all of these things
have mathematics at the core. Its a foundational language
of nature.
Nature speaks in mathematics. Mathematics is us reverse engi-
neering the language of nature, and we have only scratched
the surface. The good news is you dont have to know a lot of
math. You just have to know basic statistics, arithmetic, etc.
You should know statistics and probability forwards and back-
wards and inside out. 
CHOOSING TO FREE YOURSELF
The hardest thing is not doing what you wantits knowing
what you want.
Be aware there are no adults. Everyone makes it up as they go
along. You have to find your own path, picking, choosing, and
discarding as you see fit. Figure it out yourself, and do it. 

How have your values changed?
When I was younger, I really, really valued freedom. Freedom
wasoneofmycorevalues.Ironically,itstillis.Itsprobablyoneof
mytopthreevalues,butitsnowadifferentdefinitionoffreedom.
My old definition was freedom to. Freedom to do anything I
want. Freedom to do whatever I feel like, whenever I feel like.
Now, the freedom Im looking for is internal freedom. Its free-
dom from. Freedom from reaction. Freedom from feeling
angry. Freedom from being sad. Freedom from being forced
to do things. Im looking for freedom from, internally and
externally, whereas before I was looking for freedom to. 
Advice to my younger self: Be exactly who you are.
Holding back means staying in bad relationships and bad
jobs for years instead of minutes.
FREEDOM FROM EXPECTATIONS
I dont measure my effectiveness at all. I dont believe in
self-measurement. I feel like this is a form of self-discipline,
self-punishment, and self-conflict. 
If you hurt other people because they have expectations of
you, thats their problem. If they have an agreement with
you, its your problem. But, if they have an expectation of you,
thats completely their problem. It has nothing to do with you.
Theyre going to have lots of expectations out of life. The sooner
you can dash their expectations, the better. 
Courage isnt charging into a machine gun nest. Courage is
not caring what other people think.
Anyone who has known me for a long time knows my defining
characteristic is a combination of being very impatient and
willful. I dont like to wait. I hate wasting time. Im very famous
for being rude at parties, events, dinners, where the moment I
figure out its a waste of my time, I leave immediately.
Value your time. It is all you have. Its more important than
your money. Its more important than your friends. It is more
important than anything. Your time is all you have. Do not
waste your time.
This doesnt mean you cant relax. As long as youre doing what
you want, its not a waste of your time. But if youre not spend-
ing your time doing what you want, and youre not earning, and
youre not learningwhat the heck are you doing?
Dont spend your time making other people happy. Other
people being happy is their problem. Its not your problem. If
you are happy, it makes other people happy. If youre happy,
other people will ask you how you became happy and they
might learn from it, but you are not responsible for making
other people happy. 
FREEDOM FROM ANGER
What is anger? Anger is a way to signal as strongly as you can
to the other party youre capable of violence. Anger is a pre-
cursor to violence.

Observe when youre angryanger is a loss of control over
the situation. Anger is a contract you make with yourself to
be in physical and mental and emotional turmoil until reality
changes. 
Anger is its own punishment. An angry person trying to push
your head below water is drowning at the same time.
FREEDOM FROM EMPLOYMENT
People who live far below their means enjoy a freedom that
people busy upgrading their lifestyles cant fathom. 
Once youve truly controlled your own fate, for better or for
worse, youll never let anyone else tell you what to do. 
A taste of freedom can make you unemployable.
FREEDOM FROM UNCONTROLLED THINKING
A big habit Im working on is trying to turn off my monkey
mind. When were children, were pretty blank slates. We
live very much in the moment. We essentially just react to our
environment through our instincts. We live in what I would
call the real world. Puberty is the onset of desirethe first
time you really, really want something and you start long-range
planning. You start thinking a lot, building an identity and an
ego to get what you want.
If you walk down the street and there are a thousand people in
the street, all thousand are talking to themselves in their head
at any given point. Theyre constantly judging everything they
see. Theyre playing back movies of things that happened to
them yesterday. Theyre living in fantasy worlds of whats going
to happen tomorrow. Theyre just pulled out of base reality.
That can be good when you do long-range planning. It can be
good when you solve problems. Its good for us as survival-and-
replication machines.
I think its actually very bad for your happiness. To me, the
mind should be a servant and a tool, not a master. My monkey
mind should not control and drive me 24/7.
I want to break the habit of uncontrolled thinking, which is
hard. 
A busy mind accelerates the passage of subjective time.
There is no endpoint to self-awareness and self-discovery. Its
a lifelong process you hopefully keep getting better and better
at. There is no one meaningful answer, and no one is going to
fully solve it unless youre one of these enlightened characters.
Maybe some of us will get there, but Im not likely to, given how
involved I am in the rat race. The best case is Im a rat who
might be able to look up at the clouds once in a while.
I think just being aware youre a rat in a race is about as far as
most of us are going to get. 

The modern struggle:
Lone individuals summoning inhuman willpower, fasting,
meditating, and exercising
Up against armies of scientists and statisticians weaponizing
abundant food, screens, and medicine into junk food,
clickbait news, infinite porn, endless games, and addictive
drugs.
PHILOSOPHY
The real truths are heresies. They cannot be spoken. Only
discovered, whispered, and perhaps read.

THE MEANINGS OF LIFE
A really unbounded, big question: what is the meaning and
purpose of life?
Thats a big question. Because its a big question, Ill give you
three answers.
Answer 1: Its personal. You have to find your own meaning.
Any piece of wisdom anybody else gives you, whether its
Buddha or me, is going to sound like nonsense. Fundamentally,
you have to find it for yourself, so the important part is not
the answer, its the question. You just have to sit there and dig
with the question. It might take you years or decades. When
you find an answer youre happy with, it will be fundamental
to your life.
Answer 2: There is no meaning to life. There is no purpose to
life. Osho said, Its like writing on water or building houses
of sand. The reality is youve been dead for the history of the
Universe, 10 billion years or more. You will be dead for the
next 70 billion years or so, until the heat death of the Universe.
Anything you do will fade. It will disappear, just like the human
race will disappear and the planet will disappear. Even the
group who colonizes Mars will disappear. No one is going to
remember you past a certain number of generations, whether
youre an artist, a poet, a conqueror, a pauper, or anyone else.
Theres no meaning.
You have to create your own meaning, which is what it boils
down to. You have to decide:
Is this a play Im just watching?
Is there a self-actualization dance Im doing?
Is there a specific thing I desire just for the heck of it?
These are all meanings you make up.
There is no fundamental, intrinsic purposeful meaning to
the Universe. If there was, then you would just ask the next
question. Youd say, Why is that the meaning? It would be,
as physicist Richard Feynman said, it would be turtles all the
way down. The whys would keep accumulating. There is no
answer you could give that wouldnt have another why.
I dont buy the everlasting afterlife answers because its insane
to me, with absolutely no evidence, to believe because of how
you live seventy years here on this planet, youre going to spend
eternity, which is a very long time, in some afterlife. What kind
of silly God judges you for eternity based on some small period
of time here? I think after this life, its very much like before
you were born. Remember that? Its going to be just like that.
Before you were born, you didnt care about anything or
anyone, including your loved ones, including yourself, includ-
ing humans, including whether we go to Mars or whether we
stay on planet Earth, whether theres an AI or not. After death,
you just dont care either.
Answer3:ThelastanswerIllgiveyouisalittlemorecomplicated.
From what Ive read in science (friends of mine have written
booksonthis),Ivestitchedtogethersometheories.Maybethere
is a meaning to life, but its not a very satisfying purpose.
Basically, in physics, the arrow of time comes from entropy.

The second law of thermodynamics states entropy only goes
up, which means disorder in the Universe only goes up, which
means concentrated free energy only goes down. If you look
at living things (humans, plants, civilizations, what have you)
these systems are locally reversing entropy. Humans locally
reverse entropy because we have action.
In the process, we globally accelerate entropy until the heat
death of the Universe. You could come up with some fanciful
theory, which I like, that were headed towards the heat death
of the Universe. In that death, theres no concentrated energy,
and everything is at the same energy level. Therefore, were all
one thing. Were essentially indistinguishable.
What we do as living systems accelerates getting to that state.
The more complex system you create, whether its through
computers, civilization, art, mathematics, or creating a
familyyou actually accelerate the heat death of the Universe.
Youre pushing us towards this point where we end up as one
thing. 
LIVE BY YOUR VALUES
What are your core values?
Ive never fully enumerated them, but a few examples:
Honesty is a core, core, core value. By honesty, I mean I want to
be able to just be me. I never want to be in an environment or
around people where I have to watch what I say. If I disconnect
what Im thinking from what Im saying, it creates multiple
threads in my mind. Im no longer in the momentnow I have
to be future-planning or past-regretting every time I talk to
somebody. Anyone around whom I cant be fully honest, I dont
want to be around.
Before you can lie to another, you must first lie to yourself.
Another example of a foundational value: I dont believe in
any short-term thinking or dealing. If Im doing business with
somebody and they think in a short-term manner with some-
body else, then I dont want to do business with them anymore.
All benefits in life come from compound interest, whether in
money, relationships, love, health, activities, or habits. I only
want to be around people I know Im going to be around for
the rest of my life. I only want to work on things I know have
long-term payout.
Another one is I only believe in peer relationships. I dont
believe in hierarchical relationships. I dont want to be above
anybody, and I dont want to be below anybody. If I cant treat
someone like a peer and if they cant treat me like peer, I just
dont want to interact with them.
Another: I dont believe in anger anymore. Anger was good
when I was young and full of testosterone, but now I like the
Buddhist saying, Anger is a hot coal you hold in your hand
while waiting to throw it at somebody. I dont want to be angry,
and I dont want to be around angry people. I just cut them out
of my life. Im not judging them. I went through a lot of anger
too. They have to work through it on their own. Go be angry
at someone else, somewhere else.
I dont know if these necessarily fall into the classical defini-

tion of values, but its a set of things I wont compromise on and
I live my entire life by.  I think everybody has values. Much
of finding great relationships, great coworkers, great lovers,
wives, husbands, is finding other people where your values line
up. If your values line up, the little things dont matter. Gener-
ally, I find if people are fighting or quarreling about something,
its because their values dont line up. If their values lined up,
the little things wouldnt matter. 
Meeting my wife was a great test because I really wanted to be
with her, and she wasnt so sure at the beginning. In the end,
we ended up together because she saw my values. I am lucky I
had developed them by that point. If I hadnt, I wouldnt have
gotten her. I wouldnt have deserved her. As investor Charlie
Munger says, To find a worthy mate, be worthy of a worthy
mate. 
My wife is an incredibly lovely, family-oriented person, and
so am I. That was one of the foundational values that brought
us together.
The moment you have a child, its this really weird thing, but
it answers the meaning-of-life, purpose-of-life, question. All
of a sudden, the most important thing in the Universe moves
from being in your body into the childs body. That changes you.
Your values inherently become a lot less selfish. 
RATIONAL BUDDHISM
The older the question, the older the answers.
Youve called your philosophy Rational Buddhism. How does
it differ from traditional Buddhism? What type of explora-
tion did you go through?
The rational part means I have to reconcile with science and
evolution. I have to reject all the pieces I cant verify for myself.
For example, is meditation good for you? Yes. Is clearing your
mind a good thing? Yes. Is there a base layer of awareness
below your monkey mind? Yes. All these things Ive verified
for myself.
Some beliefs from Buddhism I believe and follow because,
again, Ive verified or reasoned with thought experiments
myself. What I will not accept is things like, Theres a past
life youre paying off the karma for. I havent seen it. I dont
remember any past lives. I dont have any memory. I just have
to not believe that.
When people say your third chakra is opening, etc.I dont
knowthats just fancy nomenclature. I have not been able to
verify or confirm any of that on my own. If I cant verify it on
my own or if I cannot get there through science, then it may
be true, it may be false, but its not falsifiable, so I cannot view
it as a fundamental truth.
On the other side, I do know evolution is true. I do know we
are evolved as survival and replication machines. I do know we
have an ego, so we get up off the ground and worms dont eat us
and we actually take action. Rational Buddhism, to me, means
understanding the internal work Buddhism espouses to make
yourself happier, better off, more present and in control of
your emotionsbeing a better human being.

I dont subscribe to anything fanciful because it was written
down in a book. I dont think I can levitate. I dont think medi-
tation will give me superpowers and those kinds of things. Try
everything, test it for yourself, be skeptical, keep whats useful,
and discard whats not.
I would say my philosophy falls down to thison one pole is
evolution as a binding principle because it explains so much
about humans, on the other is Buddhism, which is the oldest,
most time-tested spiritual philosophy regarding the internal
state of each of us.
I think those are absolutely reconcilable. I actually want to
write a blog post at some point about how you can map the
tenants of Buddhism, especially the non-fanciful ones, directly
into a virtual reality simulation. 
Everyone starts out innocent. Everyone is corrupted. Wisdom
is the discarding of vices and the return to virtue, by way of
knowledge.
How do you define wisdom?
Understanding the long-term consequences of your
actions. 
If wisdom could be imparted through words alone, wed all
be done here.

THE PRESENT IS ALL WE HAVE
There is actually nothing but this moment. No one has ever
gone back in time, and no one has ever been able to success-
fully predict the future in any way that matters. Literally, the
only thing that exists is this exact point where you are in space
at the exact time you happen to be here.
Like all great profound truths, its all paradoxes. Any two points
are infinitely different. Any moment is perfectly unique. Each
moment itself slips by so quickly you cant grab it. 
Youre dying and being reborn at every moment. Its up to you
whether to forget or remember that. 
Everything is more beautiful because were doomed. You will
never be lovelier than you are now, and we will never be
here again.
Homer, The Iliad
I dont even remember what I said two minutes ago. At best,
the past is some fictional little memory tape in my head. As
far as Im concerned, my past is dead. Its gone. All death really
means is that there are no more future moments. 
Inspiration is perishableact on it immediately.
INSPIRATION IS PERISHABLE, ACT ON IT IMMEDIATELY.
INSPIRATION IS PERISHABLE, ACT ON IT IMMEDIATELY.
BONUS
The democratization of technology allows anyone to be a
creator, entrepreneur, scientist. The future is brighter.

Its statistically likely there are more advanced alien
civilizations out there.
Hopefully, theyre good environmentalists and find us cute.
NAVALS
RECOMMENDED
READING
The truth is, I dont read for self-improvement. I read out of
curiosity and interest. The best book is the one youll devour.

BOOKS
(Since there are so many links in this section, you may prefer a
digital copy. Go to Navalmanack.com to get a digital version of
this chapter for your convenience.)
Read enough, and you become a connoisseur. Then you
naturally gravitate more toward theory, concepts, nonfiction.
NONFICTION
The Beginning of Innity: Explanations That Transform the
World by David Deutsch
Not the easiest read, but it made me smarter. 
Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind
by Yuval Noah Harari
A history of the human species. The
observations, frameworks, and mental
models will have you looking at history
and your fellow humans differently. 
Sapiens is the best book of the last decade I have read. He had
decades to write Sapiens. There are lots of great ideas in there
and its just full of them, chock-full per page. 
The Rational Optimist: How Prosperity Evolves by Matt Ridley
The most brilliant and enlightening book Ive read in years. He
has written four of my top twenty books. 
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.
Everything else written by Matt Ridley.
Mattisascientist,optimist,andforward
thinker. One of my favorite authors. Ive
read everything of his, and reread every-
thing of his. 
 Genome: The Autobiography of a Species in 23 Chapters
 The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature
 The Origins of Virtue: Human Instincts and the Evolution
of Cooperation
 The Evolution of Everything: How New Ideas Emerge
Skin in the Game by Nassim Taleb
The best book I read in 2018, I highly
recommend it. Lots of great ideas in
there. Lots of good mental models and
constructs. He has a bit of an attitude,
but he has that because hes brilliant, and its okay. So just look
past the attitude and read the book, learn the concepts. Its one
of the best business books Ive ever read. And luckily, it doesnt
masquerade as a business book. 
The Bed of Procrustes: Philosophical and Practical Aphorisms
by Nassim Taleb
This is his collection of ancient wisdom. He is also famous for
The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable, Antifrag-
ile: Things That Gain from Disorder, and Fooled by Randomness:
The Hidden Role of Chance in Life and in the Markets, all of
which are worth reading. 
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.

Six Easy Pieces: Essentials of Physics
Explained by Its Most Brilliant Teacher
by Richard Feynman
I would give my kids a copy of Rich-
ard Feynmans Six Easy Pieces and Six
Not-So-Easy Pieces: Einsteins Relativity, Symmetry, and Space-
Time. Richard Feynman is a famous physicist. I love both his
demeanor as well as his understanding of physics.
Ive also been reading Perfectly Reasonable Deviations from
the Beaten Track by Feynman and rereading Genius: The Life
and Science of Richard Feynman, a biography about him. 
Thing Explainer: Complicated Stu in
Simple Words by Randall Munroe
A great book by Randall Munroe (cre-
ator of xkcd, a very science-oriented
webcomic). In this book, he explains
very complicated concepts, all the way from climate change
to physical systems to submarines while only using the thou-
sand most common words in the English language. He called
the Saturn Five rocket Up Goer Five. You cant define a rocket
as a spaceship or a rocket. Its self-referential. He says up goer.
Its this thing that goes up. Kids get it right away. 
Thinking Physics: Understandable Prac-
tical Reality by Lewis Carroll Epstein
Theres another great book called Think-
ing Physics. I open this one all the time.
I love on the back cover how it has this
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.
great little pitch that says, The only book used in both grade
school and graduate school. Its true. Its all simple physics
puzzles that can be explained to a twelve-year-old child and
can be explained to a twenty-five-year-old grad student in
physics. They all have fundamental insights in physics. Theyre
all kind of tricky, but anyone can get to the answer through
purely logical reasoning. 
The Lessons of History by Will and Ariel Durant
This is a great book I really like that summarizes some of the
larger themes of history; its very incisive. And unlike most
history books, its actually really small, and it covers a lot of
ground. 
The Sovereign Individual: Mastering the Transition to the
Information Age by James Dale Davidson and Lord William
Rees-Mogg
This is the best book Ive read since Sapiens (far less main-
stream, though).
Poor Charlies Almanack: The Wit and
Wisdom of Charles T. Munger by Charlie
Munger (edited by Peter Kaufman)
This masquerades as a business book,
but its really just Charlie Munger (of
Berkshire Hathaway)s advice on overcoming oneself to live a
successful and virtuous life.  
Reality Is Not What It Seems: The Journey to Quantum Gravity
by Carlo Rovelli
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.

This is the best book Ive read in the last year. Physics, poetry,
philosophy, and history packaged in a very accessible form.
Seven Brief Lessons on Physics by Carlo Rovelli
Ive read this one at least twice.
For game theory, in addition to playing strategy games, you
may want to try The Compleat Strategyst: Being a Primer on the
Theory of Games of Strategy by J.D. Williams and The Evolution
of Cooperation by Robert Axelrod. 
PHILOSOPHY AND SPIRITUALITY
Everything by Jed McKenna
Jed spits raw truth. His style may be off-putting, but the ded-
ication to truth is unparalleled. 
Theory of Everything (The Enlightened Perspective) - Dream-
state Trilogy
Jed McKennas Notebook
Jed Talks #1 and #2
Everything by Kapil Gupta, MD
Kapil recently became a personal advisor and coach to me, and
this comes from a person who doesnt believe in coaches. 
A Masters Secret Whispers: For those who abhor noise and seek
The Truthabout life and living
Direct Truth: Uncompromising, non-prescriptive Truths to the
enduring questions of life
Atmamun: The Path to achieving the bliss of the Himalayan
Swamis. And the freedom of a living God.
The Book of Life by Jiddu Krishnamurti
Krishnamurti is a lesser-known guy,
an Indian philosopher who lived at the
turn of the last century and is extremely
influential to me. Hes an uncompromis-
ing, very direct person who basically tells you to look at your
own mind at all times. I have been hugely influenced by him.
Probably the best book is The Book of Life, which is excerpts
from his various speeches and books stitched together. 
Ill give my kids a copy of The Book of Life. Ill tell them to save
it until theyre older because it wont make much sense while
theyre younger. 
Total Freedom: The Essential Krishnamurti by Jiddu
Krishnamurti
I like this for someone whos more advanced. A rationalists
guide to the perils of the human mind. The spiritual book I
keep returning to. 
Siddhartha by Herman Hesse
I love this as a classic book on philosophy, a good introduction
for someone starting out. Ive given out more copies of this
book than any other. 
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.

Im pretty much always rereading something by either
Krishnamurti or Osho. Those are my favorite philosophers. 
[Update: Id now add Jed McKenna, Kapil Gupta, the Vashistha
Yoga, and Schopenhauer to that list.]
The Book of Secrets: 112 Meditations to
Discover the Mystery Within by Osho
Most meditation techniques are con-
centration methods, and there are many,
many meditation techniques. If you
want to run through a bunch of them, you can pick up a book
called The Book of Secrets by Osho. I know hes gotten a bad rap
recently, but he was a pretty smart guy. Its actually a transla-
tion of an old Sanskrit book with 112 different meditations. You
can try each one and see which one works for you. 
The Great Challenge: Exploring the World Within by Osho
The Way to Love: The Last Meditations of Anthony de Mello by
Anthony de Mello
The Untethered Soul: The Journey Beyond Yourself by Michael
Singer
Meditations by Marcus Aurelius
Marcus Aurelius was absolutely life-
changing for me. Its the personal diary
of the emperor of Rome. Heres a guy
who was probably the most powerful
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.
human being on Earth at the time he lived. Hes writing a diary
to himself, never expecting it to be published. When you open
this book, you realize he had all the same issues and all the
same mental struggles; he was trying to be a better person.
Right there, you figure out success and power dont improve
your internal stateyou still have to work on it. 
Love Yourself Like Your Life Depends on It by Kamal Ravikant
Ive actually been reading my brothers book, Love Yourself Like
Your Life Depends on It. I thought it was very succinctly written.
(Obviously a plug for my bro.)
Hes the philosopher in the familyIm just the amateur. He
has a great line in his book:
I once asked a monk how he found peace.
I say yes, hed said. To all that happens, I say yes. 
The Tao of Seneca: Practical Letters from a Stoic Master
My most listened-to audiobook. The most important audio-
book Ive ever heard.
How to Change Your Mind by Michael
Pollan
Theres a good book Michael Pollan
wrote recently called How to Change
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.

Your Mind, and I think it is a brilliant book everybody should
read.
The book discusses psychedelics. Psychedelics are a bit of a
cheat code in self-observation. I dont recommend drugs for
anybodyyou can do it all through pure meditation. If you
want to accelerate ahead, you know, psychedelics are good for
that. 
Striking Thoughts: Bruce Lees Wisdom for Daily Living by
Bruce Lee
Oddly enough, Bruce Lee wrote some great philosophy, and
Striking Thoughts is a good summary of some of his philosophy.
The Prophet by Kahlil Gibran
This book reads like a modern-day poetic religious tome. Its
up there with the Bhagavad Gita, the Tao Te Ching, the Bible,
and the Quran. It is written in the style where it has a feel of
religiosity and truth, but it was very approachable, beautiful,
nondenominational, and nonsectarian. I loved this book.
He has a gift for poetically describing what children are like,
what lovers are like, what marriage should be like, how you
should treat your enemies and your friends, how you should
work with money, what can you think of every time you have
to kill something to eat it. I felt it, like the great religious books,
gave a very deep, very philosophical, but very true answer to
how to approach the major problems in life. I recommend The
Prophet to anybody, whether youre religious or not. Whether
you are Christian, Hindu, Jewish, or atheist. I think its a beau-
tiful book, and its worth reading. 
SCIENCE FICTION
I started with comic books and sci-fi. Then I was into
history and news. Then into psychology, popular science,
technology.
Ficciones by Jorge Luis Borges
I love Jorge Luis Borges, an Argen-
tine author. His short story collection
Ficciones, or Labyrinths, is amazing.
Borges is probably still the most pow-
erful author I have read who wasnt just outright writing
philosophy. There was philosophy in there with the sci-fi. 
Stories of Your Life and Others by Ted
Chiang
My current favorite sci-fi short story:
probably Understand by Ted Chiang.
Its in a collection called Stories of Your
Life and Others. Story of Your Life was made into a movie
called Arrival. 
Exhalation: Stories by Ted Chiang
This contemplates the marvel of thermodynamics from the
best sci-fi short story writer of our age.
The Lifecycle of Software Objects by Ted Chiang
Another masterpiece of sci-fi by Ted Chiang.
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.

Snow Crash by Neal Stephenson
Snow Crash is an amazing, amazing
book. Theres nothing quite similar to
Snow Crash. Snow Crash is in a league
of its own. Stephenson also wrote The
Diamond Age.
The Last Question, a short story by Isaac Asimov
I quote The Last Question all the time. I loved it as a kid.
What are the books youre rereading now?
Thats a good question. Ill pull up my Kindle app as we talk.
Usually, Im always rereading some books in science.
Im reading a book on Ren Girards mimetic theory. Its more
of an overview book, because I couldnt make it through his
actual writings. Im reading Tools of Titans, Tim Ferrisss book
of what he learned from a lot of great performers.
Im reading a book, Thermoinfocomplexity. Its actually by
a friend of mine, Behzad Mohit. I just finished reading Pre-
Suasion: A Revolutionary Way to Inuence and Persuade, or
I should say I just finished skimming Pre-Suasion by Robert
Cialdini. I dont think I needed to read the entire book to get
the point, but it was still good to read what I did. Its a great
little history book. Im currently reading The Story of Philos-
ophy: The Lives and Opinions of the Great Philosophers, also
by Will Durant.
I have a young kid now, so Ive got a lot of child-rearing books
Open the camera on your phone and hover over this image.
I use more as reference material than anything else. I recently
readsomeEmersonandsomeChesterfield.IhaveaLeoTolstoy
book here.
Alan Watts. Scott Adams. I reread Gods Debris recently. Tao Te
Ching, a friend of mine is rereading it, so I picked it up again.
Theres tons. I mean, I could go on and on. Theres Nietzsches
book here. Theres The Undercover Economist [Tim Harford].
The Richard Bach book [Illusions: The Adventures of a Reluctant
Messiah]. There are some Jed McKenna books.
A little Dale Carnegie in here. The Three-Body Problem [Cixin
Liu]. Mans Search for Meaning [Viktor E. Frankl]. Theres lots.
SexatDawn[ChristopherRyan].Theresalotofbooksoutthere.
By the way, when I tell people what Im reading, I skip two-
thirds of my books. The reason I skip two-thirds is because
theyre embarrassing. They dont sound like good books to
read. Theyll sound trivial or silly. Who cares? I dont have to
tell everybody everything I read. I read all kinds of stuff other
people consider junk or even reprehensible. I read all kinds of
stuff I disagree with because theyre mind-bending. 
I always spent money on books. I never viewed that as an
expense. Thats an investment to me. 
BLOGS
(Since there are so many links in this section, you may prefer a
digital copy. Go to Navalmanack.com to get a digital version of
this chapter for your convenience.)

Some amazing blogs out there:
@KevinSimlerMelting Asphalt, https://meltingasphalt.com/
@farnamstreetFarnam Street, A Signal in a World Full of
Noise, https://fs.blog/
@benthompsonStratchery, https://stratechery.com/
@baconmeteorIdle Words, https://idlewords.com/ 
TheMungerOperatingSystem:HowtoLiveaLifeThatReally
Works by @FarnamStreet
Rules to live and prosper by.
The Day You Became a Better Writer by Scott Adams
Even though I am a very good writer and Ive been writing a
lot since I was young, I still open up that blog post and put it
in the background anytime Im writing anything important.
Its that good. I use it as my basic template for how to write
well. Think about the title, The Day You Became a Better
Writer. Its such a powerful title. He teaches you in one small
blog post the importance of surprise, the importance of head-
lines, the importance of being brief and directed, not using
some adjectives and adverbs, using active not the passive
voice, etc. This one blog post right there will change your
writing style forever if you put your ego down and absorb it
properly. 
Want to become smarter in ten minutes? Absorb this: Crony
Beliefs by Kevin Simler.
Best post Ive read on Career Decisions (in Silicon Valley/
tech) by @eladgil
Hararis Sapiens in lecture/course form on YouTube.
Every business school should have a course on Aggregation
Theory. Or learn it from the master himself, @benthompson,
the best analyst in technology.
Great read. Quantum physics is not weird. You are weird.
Think Like Reality [Eliezer Yudkowsky]
Must-read. Lazy Leadership by @Awilkinson
No-holds-barred wisdom from a self-made man. Everything on
@EdLatimores site is worth reading for overachievers: https://
edlatimore.com/
If you eat, invest, and think according to what the news
advocates, youll end up nutritionally, financially, and
morally bankrupt.
OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS
Twitter accounts like:
@AmuseChimp (my all-time favorite Twitter account)
@mmay3r
@nntaleb

Art De Vany (on Facebook)
Genius is here, just unevenly distributed. 
Must-read. (Twitter thread on intellectual compounding by
@zaoyang). 
There are actually some really good graphic novels out there.
If youre open to the cartoony element of it, Transmetropoli-
tan [Warren Ellis], The Boys [Garth Ennis], Planetary [Warren
Ellis], and The Sandman [Neil Gaiman]some of these are, I
think, among the finest works of art of our age. I also grew
up as a boy reading comics, so I may be very biased toward
those. 
Rick and Morty (TV show + comic book)
RickandMortyisthebestshowontelevision(IMHO,ofcourse).
Just watch the first episodethats all it takes. Its Back to the
Future meets The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy.
The Rick and Morty comic [by Zac Gorman] is just as clever
as the show.
You and Your Research by Richard Hamming
A beautiful essay, I highly recommend reading it. Its ostensibly
written for people who are in scientific research, but I think it
applies across the board. Its just an old-timer essay on how to
do great work. It reminds me of much of what Richard Feyn-
man used to say, although I think Hamming has put it more
eloquently than almost anywhere else Ive seen. 
NAVALS WRITING
LIFE FORMULAS I (2008)
These are notes to myself. Your frame of reference, and
therefore your calculations, may vary. These are not defini-
tionsthese are algorithms for success. Contributions are
welcome.
 Happiness = Health + Wealth + Good Relationships
 Health = Exercise + Diet + Sleep
 Exercise = High Intensity Resistance Training + Sports +
Rest
 Diet = Natural Foods + Intermittent Fasting + Plants
 Sleep = No alarms + 89 hours + Circadian rhythms
 Wealth = Income + Wealth * (Return on Investment)
 Income = Accountability + Leverage + Specific Knowledge
 Accountability = Personal Branding + Personal Platform
+ Taking Risk?
 Leverage = Capital + People + Intellectual Property
 SpecificKnowledge=Knowinghowtodosomethingsociety
cannot yet easily train other people to do
 Return on Investment = Buy-and-Hold + Valuation +
Margin of Safety 

NAVALS RULES (2016)
 Be present above all else.
 Desire is suffering. (Buddha)
 Anger is a hot coal you hold in your hand while waiting to
throw it at someone else. (Buddha)
 If you cant see yourself working with someone for life,
dont work with them for a day.
 Reading (learning) is the ultimate meta-skill and can be
traded for anything else.
 All the real benefits in life come from compound interest.
 Earn with your mind, not your time.
 99 percent of all effort is wasted.
 Total honesty at all times. Its almost always possible to be
honest and positive.
 Praise specifically, criticize generally. (Warren Buffett)
 Truth is that which has predictive power.
 Watch every thought. (Ask Why am I having this thought?)
 All greatness comes from suffering.
 Love is given, not received.
 Enlightenment is the space between your thoughts. (Eck-
hart Tolle)
 Mathematics is the language of nature.
 Every moment has to be complete in and of itself. 
Health, love, and your mission, in that order. Nothing else
matters.
NEXT ON NAVAL
If you loved this book, there are many ways to dive deeper into
Naval. I am publishing Navalmanack shorts on Navalmanack.
com. These are sections that were edited out of the original
(enormous) manuscript of this book. Ive published them
online for those interested in Navals more specific insights on:
 Education
 The Story of AngelList
 Investing
 Startups
 Crypto
 Relationships
Naval continues to create and share great insights:
 On Twitter: Twitter.com/Naval
 On his podcast: Naval
 On his website: https://nav.al/
The most popular of Navals material at the time of writing:
 Naval podcast episodes compilation:How to Get Rich

 Interview on The Knowledge Project
 Interview on Joe Rogan Podcast
Readwise.io has generously created a collection of excerpts of
thisbook,availablethroughReadwise.io/naval.Youwillreceive
a weekly email with key excerpts from this book to keep the
concepts top-of-mind long after youve finished reading.
If you love the illustrations by Jack Butcher, you can find more
of his illustrations of Navals ideas on Navalmanack.com and
more of his work at VisualizeValue.com.
APPRECIATION
There is so much to be grateful for, and so many people to
be grateful to. I am overwhelmed with happiness when I con-
sider all of the people who contributed pieces of themselves to
create this book. I feel a rising, inflating warmth of gratitude
for all of you.
Here is my written Oscars speech of thanks and appreciation:
Im extremely grateful to Naval for trusting a stranger from
the internet to create a book out of his words. This all started
with a half-assed tweet, and became something great because
of your trust and support. I appreciate your responsiveness,
generosity, and trust.
I am grateful to Babak Nivi for the most succinct and precise
writing advice Ive ever received. You have been generous with
your time to make this book better, and I really appreciate it.
I am grateful to Tim Ferriss for bending your iron rule and
writing the foreword for this book. Your presence in this proj-
ect means a lot to me and will certainly help many more people
find their way to Navals wisdom.

The building blocks of this book are excerpts from excellent
interviews of creators like Shane Parrish, Joe Rogan, Sarah
Lacy, and Tim Ferriss. I massively appreciate all of the effort
that goes into your interviews. Creating this book gave me and
others the opportunity to learn deeply from your work.
I am grateful to Jack Butcher for reaching out and offering
to lend his enormous talents to creating the illustrations for
this book. His work at Visualize Value has always struck me as
simple genius, and were all lucky to have his efforts in these
pages.
I am grateful to my parents for every gift, effort, and sacrifice
that has put me in a position to create this book. You built the
foundation of everything I ever do, and Ill never forget that.
The family practice of spitting your doubts is alive and well
in this project.
I am grateful to Jeannine Seidl for being a one-woman support
system of love and encouragement. You are an endless spring
of positivity, patience, and good advice. Thank you for always
keeping morale high.
I am grateful to Kathleen Martin for being a truly wonderful
line editor and doing her very best work on this project. (And
thanks to David Perell for introducing us.)
I am grateful to Kusal Kularatne for his many contributions.
You were an early believer, an early reader, and a huge help
when this project was young and fragile. I appreciate you and
thank you for your service.
I am grateful to Max Olson, Emily Holdman, and Taylor Pear-
son. You are all wonderful friends who became extremely
helpful advisors to me throughout this book-building and
publishing process. Without you, Id still be googling things
and mumbling curses.
I am grateful to my posse of early readers for their time, edits,
and wise advice. Every one of you made valuable contributions
to this book, and it wouldnt be what it is without you. My deep-
est appreciation for each of you: Andrew Farah, Tristan Homsi,
Daniel Doyon, Jessie Jacobs, Sean OConnor, Adam Waxman,
Kaylan Perry, Chris Quintero, George Mack, Brent Beshore,
Shane Parrish, Taylor Pearson, Ben Crane, Candace Wu, Shane
Mac, Jesse Powers, Trevor McKendrick, David Perell, Natala
Constantine, Ben Jackson, Noah Madden, Chris Gillett, Megan
Darnell, and Zach Anderson Pettet.
I am grateful to the authors and creators who inspired this
book. My drive to create and share this book came directly out
of a deep appreciation for the life-changing impact of similar
books, a few Id like to name specifically:
 Poor Charlies Almanack edited by Peter Kaufman (of Char-
lie Mungers work)
 Zero to One by Blake Masters (of Peter Thiels work)
 Seeking Wisdom (and others) by Peter Bevelin (of Buffett
and Mungers work)
 Berkshire Hathaway Letters to Shareholders edited by Max
Olson (of Buffetts work)
 Principles by Ray Dalio (and team)
I am grateful to the team at Scribe, for being early and earnest
supporters of this book. Zach Obront provides fantastic advice,
and Hal Clifford is a patient and persistent editor.

I am grateful to Tucker Max for creating Scribe, hiring a great
team, and for the very personal attention and effort in this
project. I appreciate your willingness to hurt my feelings in
pursuit of a great product. And I deeply appreciate your trust
in me to do good work.
I am grateful to Bo and the whole team at Zaarly for their
patience and grace around my obsession with this book and
the effort that went into it.
I am grateful for the support of many friends and strangers
online who supported and encouraged me throughout this
project. My DMs overflow with kind words and eager inquiries.
I appreciate every gesture. Your energy helped pull me through
the thousand hours it took to create this for you.